---
title: "Preface"
layout: page
---


Welcome to *Psychology*, an OpenStax resource. This textbook has been created with several goals in mind: accessibility, customization, and student engagement—all while encouraging students toward high levels of academic scholarship. Instructors and students alike will find that this textbook offers a strong foundation in psychology in an accessible format.

# About OpenStax

OpenStax is a non-profit organization committed to improving student access to quality learning materials. Our free textbooks go through a rigorous editorial publishing process. Our texts are developed and peer-reviewed by educators to ensure they are readable, accurate, and meet the scope and sequence requirements of today’s college courses. Unlike traditional textbooks, OpenStax resources live online and are owned by the community of educators using them. Through our partnerships with companies and foundations committed to reducing costs for students, OpenStax is working to improve access to higher education for all. OpenStax is an initiative of Rice University and is made possible through the generous support of several philanthropic foundations. Since our launch in 2012 our texts have been used by millions of learners online and over 1,200 institutions worldwide.

# About OpenStax’s Resources

OpenStax resources provide quality academic instruction. Three key features set our materials apart from others: they can be customized by instructors for each class, they are a \"living\" resource that grows online through contributions from educators, and they are available free or for minimal cost.

## Customization

OpenStax learning resources are designed to be customized for each course. Our textbooks provide a solid foundation on which instructors can build, and our resources are conceived and written with flexibility in mind. Instructors can select the sections most relevant to their curricula and create a textbook that speaks directly to the needs of their classes and student body. Teachers are encouraged to expand on existing examples by adding unique context via geographically localized applications and topical connections.

*Psychology* can be easily customized using our online platform (http://cnx.org/content/col11629/). Simply select the content most relevant to your current semester and create a textbook that speaks directly to the needs of your class. *Psychology* is organized as a collection of sections that can be rearranged, modified, and enhanced through localized examples or to incorporate a specific theme of your course. This customization feature will ensure that your textbook truly reflects the goals of your course.

## Curation

To broaden access and encourage community curation, *Psychology* is “open source” licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC-BY) license. The psychology community is invited to submit examples, emerging research, and other feedback to enhance and strengthen the material and keep it current and relevant for today’s students.

## Cost

Our textbooks are available for free online, and in low-cost print and e-book editions.

# About *Psychology*

*Psychology* is designed for the single-semester introduction to psychology course. For many students, this may be their only college-level psychology course. As such, this textbook provides an important opportunity for students to learn the core concepts of psychology and understand how those concepts apply to their lives. The text has been developed to meet the scope and sequence of most general psychology courses. At the same time, the book includes a number of innovative features designed to enhance student learning. A strength of *Psychology* is that instructors can customize the book, adapting it to the approach that works best in their classroom.

## Coverage and Scope

Our *Psychology* textbook adheres to the scope and sequence of most introductory psychology courses nationwide. We strive to make psychology, as a discipline, interesting and accessible to students. A comprehensive coverage of core concepts is grounded in both classic studies and current and emerging research, including coverage of the DSM-5 in discussions of psychological disorders. We have incorporated features and discussions that reflect the diversity within the discipline, as well as the diversity of communities across the globe, with attention to cultural competence. We include research and examples that seek to represent and include the various sociocultural backgrounds of the many students who take this course. The result is a book that covers the breadth of psychology topics with variety and depth that promote student engagement. The organization and pedagogical features were developed and vetted with feedback from psychology educators dedicated to the project. <span data-type="list" data-list-type="bulleted" data-bullet-style="bullet"><span data-type="item">Chapter 1: Introduction to Psychology</span> <span data-type="item">Chapter 2: Psychological Research</span> <span data-type="item">Chapter 3: Biopsychology</span> <span data-type="item">Chapter 4: States of Consciousness</span> <span data-type="item">Chapter 5: Sensation and Perception</span> <span data-type="item">Chapter 6: Learning</span> <span data-type="item">Chapter 7: Thinking and Intelligence</span> <span data-type="item">Chapter 8: Memory</span> <span data-type="item">Chapter 9: Lifespan Development</span> <span data-type="item">Chapter 10: Motivation and Emotion</span> <span data-type="item">Chapter 11: Personality</span> <span data-type="item">Chapter 12: Social Psychology</span> <span data-type="item">Chapter 13: Industrial-Organizational Psychology</span> <span data-type="item">Chapter 14: Stress, Lifestyle, and Health</span> <span data-type="item">Chapter 15: Psychological Disorders</span> <span data-type="item">Chapter 16: Therapy and Treatment</span></span>

## Pedagogical Foundation   {#eip-962}

Throughout *Psychology*, you will find features that draw the students into psychological inquiry by taking selected topics a step further. Our features include: <span data-type="list" data-list-type="bulleted" id="eip-idp18059328"><span data-type="item">**Everyday Connection** features tie psychological topics to everyday issues and behaviors that students encounter in their lives and the world. Topics include the validity of scores on college entrance exams, advertising and associative learning, and cognitive mapping.</span> <span data-type="item">**What Do You Think?** features provide research-based information on a controversial issue and ask students their view through discussions like “Brain Dead and on Life Support,” “Hooters and BFOQ Laws,” and “Intellectually Disabled Criminals and Capital Punishment.”</span> <span data-type="item">**Dig Deeper** features discuss one specific aspect of a topic in greater depth so students can dig more deeply into the concept. Examples include a discussion on the distinction between evolutionary psychology and behavioral genetics, an analysis of the increasing prevalence rate of ADHD, and a presentation of research on strategies for coping with prejudice and discrimination.</span> <span data-type="item">**Connect the Concepts** features revisit a concept learned in another chapter, expanding upon it within a different context. Features include “Autism Spectrum Disorder and the Expression of Emotions,” “Tweens, Teens, and Social Norms,” and “Conditioning and OCD.”</span> </span>

## Art, Interactives, and Assessments That Engage

Our art program is designed to enhance students’ understanding of psychological concepts through simple, effective graphs, diagrams, and photographs. Psychology also incorporates links to relevant interactive exercises and animations that help bring topics to life. Selected assessment items touch directly on students’ lives. <span data-type="list" data-list-type="bulleted" id="eip-idp139814595979104"><span data-type="item">**Link to Learning** features direct students to online interactive exercises and animations that add a fuller context to core content and provide an opportunity for application.</span> <span data-type="item">**Personal Application Questions** engage students in topics at a personal level that encourages reflection and promotes discussion. </span></span>

# Ancillaries

OpenStax projects offer an array of ancillaries for students and instructors. The following resources are available. <span data-type="list" data-list-type="bulleted" id="eip-idp35082352"><span data-type="item">PowerPoint Slides</span> <span data-type="item">Test Bank</span></span> Our resources are continually expanding, so please visit http://openstaxcollege.org to view an up-to-date list of the Learning Resources for this title and to find information on accessing these resources.

# About Our Team

<span data-type="title">Senior Content Lead</span>Rose M. Spielman, PhD* * *
{: data-type="newline"}

 Dr. Rose Spielman has been teaching psychology and working as a licensed clinical psychologist for 20 years. Her academic career has included positions at Quinnipiac University, Housatonic Community College, and Goodwin College. As a licensed clinical psychologist, educator, and volunteer director, Rose is able to connect with people from diverse backgrounds and facilitate treatment, advocacy, and education. In her years of work as a teacher, therapist, and administrator, she has helped thousands of students and clients and taught them to advocate for themselves and move their lives forward to become more productive citizens and family members.

<span data-type="title">Senior Contributors</span><span data-type="list" data-list-type="bulleted" data-bullet-style="bullet"><span data-type="item">Kathryn Dumper, Bainbridge State College</span> <span data-type="item">William Jenkins, Mercer University</span> <span data-type="item">Arlene Lacombe, Saint Joseph’s University</span> <span data-type="item">Marilyn Lovett, Livingstone College</span> <span data-type="item">Marion Perlmutter, University of Michigan</span> </span>

<span data-type="title">Reviewers</span><span data-type="list" data-list-type="bulleted" data-bullet-style="bullet"> <span data-type="item">Daniel Bellack, Trident Technical College</span> <span data-type="item">Jerimy Blowers, Cayuga Community College</span> <span data-type="item">Salena Brody, Collin College</span> <span data-type="item">Bettina Casad, University of Missouri–St. Louis</span> <span data-type="item">Sharon Chacon, Northeast Wisconsin Technical College</span> <span data-type="item">Barbara Chappell, Walden University</span> <span data-type="item">James Corpening</span> <span data-type="item">Frank Eyetsemitan, Roger Williams University</span> <span data-type="item">Tamara Ferguson, Utah State University</span> <span data-type="item">Kathleen Flannery, Saint Anselm College</span> <span data-type="item">Johnathan Forbey, Ball State University</span> <span data-type="item">Laura Gaudet, Chadron State College</span> <span data-type="item">William Goggin, University of Southern Mississippi</span> <span data-type="item">Jeffery K. Gray, Charleston Southern University</span> <span data-type="item">Heather Griffiths, Fayetteville State University</span> <span data-type="item">Mark Holder, University of British Columbia</span> <span data-type="item">Rita Houge, Des Moines Area Community College</span> <span data-type="item">Colette Jacquot, Strayer University</span> <span data-type="item">John Johanson, Winona State University</span> <span data-type="item">Andrew Johnson, Park University</span> <span data-type="item">Shaila Khan, Tougaloo College</span> <span data-type="item">Carol Laman, Houston Community College</span> <span data-type="item">Thomas Malloy, Rhode Island College</span> <span data-type="item">Jan Mendoza, Golden West College</span> <span data-type="item">Christopher Miller, University of Minnesota</span> <span data-type="item">Lisa Moeller, Beckfield College</span> <span data-type="item">Hugh Riley, Baylor University</span> <span data-type="item">Juan Salinas, University of Texas at Austin</span> <span data-type="item">Brittney Schrick, Southern Arkansas University</span> <span data-type="item">Phoebe Scotland, College of the Rockies</span> <span data-type="item">Christine Selby, Husson University</span> <span data-type="item">Brian Sexton, Kean University</span> <span data-type="item">Nancy Simpson, Trident Technical College</span> <span data-type="item">Robert Stennett, University of Georgia </span> <span data-type="item">Jennifer Stevenson, Ursinus College </span> <span data-type="item">Eric Weiser, Curry College </span> <span data-type="item">Valjean Whitlow, American Public University </span></span>

