=====================================
What Are Intelligence and Creativity?
=====================================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Define
   intelligence \* Explain the triarchic theory of intelligence \*
   Identify the difference between intelligence theories \* Explain
   emotional intelligence

A four-and-a-half-year-old boy sits at the kitchen table with his
father, who is reading a new story aloud to him. He turns the page to
continue reading, but before he can begin, the boy says, “Wait, Daddy!”
He points to the words on the new page and reads aloud, “Go, Pig! Go!”
The father stops and looks at his son. “Can you read that?” he asks.
“Yes, Daddy!” And he points to the words and reads again, “Go, Pig! Go!”

This father was not actively teaching his son to read, even though the
child constantly asked questions about letters, words, and symbols that
they saw everywhere: in the car, in the store, on the television. The
dad wondered about what else his son might understand and decided to try
an experiment. Grabbing a sheet of blank paper, he wrote several simple
words in a list: mom, dad, dog, bird, bed, truck, car, tree. He put the
list down in front of the boy and asked him to read the words. “Mom,
dad, dog, bird, bed, truck, car, tree,” he read, slowing down to
carefully pronounce bird and truck. Then, “Did I do it, Daddy?” “You
sure did! That is very good.” The father gave his little boy a warm hug
and continued reading the story about the pig, all the while wondering
if his son’s abilities were an indication of exceptional intelligence or
simply a normal pattern of linguistic development. Like the father in
this example, psychologists have wondered what constitutes intelligence
and how it can be measured.

CLASSIFYING INTELLIGENCE
========================

What exactly is intelligence? The way that researchers have defined the
concept of intelligence has been modified many times since the birth of
psychology. British psychologist Charles Spearman believed intelligence
consisted of one general factor, called *g*, which could be measured and
compared among individuals. Spearman focused on the commonalities among
various intellectual abilities and demphasized what made each unique.
Long before modern psychology developed, however, ancient philosophers,
such as Aristotle, held a similar view (Cianciolo & Sternberg, 2004).

Others psychologists believe that instead of a single factor,
intelligence is a collection of distinct abilities. In the 1940s,
Raymond Cattell proposed a theory of intelligence that divided general
intelligence into two components: crystallized intelligence and fluid
intelligence (Cattell, 1963). **Crystallized intelligence**\ {:
data-type=“term”} is characterized as acquired knowledge and the ability
to retrieve it. When you learn, remember, and recall information, you
are using crystallized intelligence. You use crystallized intelligence
all the time in your coursework by demonstrating that you have mastered
the information covered in the course. **Fluid intelligence**\ {:
data-type=“term”} encompasses the ability to see complex relationships
and solve problems. Navigating your way home after being detoured onto
an unfamiliar route because of road construction would draw upon your
fluid intelligence. Fluid intelligence helps you tackle complex,
abstract challenges in your daily life, whereas crystallized
intelligence helps you overcome concrete, straightforward problems
(Cattell, 1963).

Other theorists and psychologists believe that intelligence should be
defined in more practical terms. For example, what types of behaviors
help you get ahead in life? Which skills promote success? Think about
this for a moment. Being able to recite all 44 presidents of the United
States in order is an excellent party trick, but will knowing this make
you a better person?

Robert Sternberg developed another theory of intelligence, which he
titled the **triarchic theory of intelligence**\ {: data-type=“term”}
because it sees intelligence as comprised of three parts (Sternberg,
1988): practical, creative, and analytical intelligence
(`[link] <#Figure_07_04_Triarchic>`__).

|Three boxes are arranged in a triangle. The top box contains
“Analytical intelligence; academic problem solving and computation.”
There is a line with arrows on both ends connecting this box to another
box containing “Practical intelligence; street smarts and common sense.”
Another line with arrows on both ends connects this box to another box
containing “Creative intelligence; imaginative and innovative problem
solving.” Another line with arrows on both ends connects this box to the
first box described, completing the triangle.|\ {:
#Figure_07_04_Triarchic}

**Practical intelligence**\ {: data-type=“term”}, as proposed by
Sternberg, is sometimes compared to “street smarts.” Being practical
means you find solutions that work in your everyday life by applying
knowledge based on your experiences. This type of intelligence appears
to be separate from traditional understanding of IQ; individuals who
score high in practical intelligence may or may not have comparable
scores in creative and analytical intelligence (Sternberg, 1988).

This story about the 2007 Virginia Tech shootings illustrates both high
and low practical intelligences. During the incident, one student left
her class to go get a soda in an adjacent building. She planned to
return to class, but when she returned to her building after getting her
soda, she saw that the door she used to leave was now chained shut from
the inside. Instead of thinking about why there was a chain around the
door handles, she went to her class’s window and crawled back into the
room. She thus potentially exposed herself to the gunman. Thankfully,
she was not shot. On the other hand, a pair of students was walking on
campus when they heard gunshots nearby. One friend said, “Let’s go check
it out and see what is going on.” The other student said, “No way, we
need to run away from the gunshots.” They did just that. As a result,
both avoided harm. The student who crawled through the window
demonstrated some creative intelligence but did not use common sense.
She would have low practical intelligence. The student who encouraged
his friend to run away from the sound of gunshots would have much higher
practical intelligence.

**Analytical intelligence**\ {: data-type=“term”} is closely aligned
with academic problem solving and computations. Sternberg says that
analytical intelligence is demonstrated by an ability to analyze,
evaluate, judge, compare, and contrast. When reading a classic novel for
literature class, for example, it is usually necessary to compare the
motives of the main characters of the book or analyze the historical
context of the story. In a science course such as anatomy, you must
study the processes by which the body uses various minerals in different
human systems. In developing an understanding of this topic, you are
using analytical intelligence. When solving a challenging math problem,
you would apply analytical intelligence to analyze different aspects of
the problem and then solve it section by section.

**Creative intelligence**\ {: data-type=“term”} is marked by inventing
or imagining a solution to a problem or situation. Creativity in this
realm can include finding a novel solution to an unexpected problem or
producing a beautiful work of art or a well-developed short story.
Imagine for a moment that you are camping in the woods with some friends
and realize that you’ve forgotten your camp coffee pot. The person in
your group who figures out a way to successfully brew coffee for
everyone would be credited as having higher creative intelligence.

**Multiple Intelligences Theory**\ {: data-type=“term”} was developed by
Howard Gardner, a Harvard psychologist and former student of Erik
Erikson. Gardner’s theory, which has been refined for more than 30
years, is a more recent development among theories of intelligence. In
Gardner’s theory, each person possesses at least eight intelligences.
Among these eight intelligences, a person typically excels in some and
falters in others (Gardner, 1983). `[link] <#Table_07_04_01>`__
describes each type of intelligence.

.. raw:: html

   <table id="Table_07_04_01" summary="A three column table describes different types of intelligences. From left to right, the columns are labeled “Intelligence Type; Characteristics; and Representative Career.” The first row, respectively, reads: “linguistic intelligence; perceives different functions of language, different sounds and meanings of words, may easily learn multiple languages; and journalist, novelist, poet, teacher.” The second row reads: “logical-mathematical intelligence; capable of seeing numerical patterns, strong ability to use reason and logic; and scientist, mathematician.” The third row reads: “musical intelligence; understands and appreciates rhythm, pitch, and tone. May play multiple instruments or perform as a vocalist; and composer, performer.” The fourth row reads: “bodily-kinesthetic intelligence; high ability to control the movements of the body and use the body to perform various physical tasks; and dancer, athlete, athletic coach, yoga instructor.” The fifth row reads: “spatial intelligence; ability to perceive the relationship between objects and how they move in space; and choreographer, sculptor, architect, aviator, sailor.” The sixth row reads: “interpersonal intelligence; ability to understand and be sensitive to the various emotional states of others; and counselor, social worker, salesperson.” The seventh row reads: “intrapersonal intelligence; ability to access personal feelings and motivations and use them to direct behavior and reach personal goals; and key component of personal success over time.” The eighth row reads: “naturalist intelligence; high capacity to appreciate the natural world and interact with the species within it; and biologist, ecologist, environmentalist.”">

.. raw:: html

   <caption>

Multiple Intelligences

.. raw:: html

   </caption>

.. raw:: html

   <thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th data-align="center">

Intelligence Type

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th data-align="center">

Characteristics

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th data-align="center">

Representative Career

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tbody>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Linguistic intelligence

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Perceives different functions of language, different sounds and meanings
of words, may easily learn multiple languages

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Journalist, novelist, poet, teacher

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Logical-mathematical intelligence

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Capable of seeing numerical patterns, strong ability to use reason and
logic

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Scientist, mathematician

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Musical intelligence

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Understands and appreciates rhythm, pitch, and tone; may play multiple
instruments or perform as a vocalist

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Composer, performer

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Bodily kinesthetic intelligence

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

High ability to control the movements of the body and use the body to
perform various physical tasks

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Dancer, athlete, athletic coach, yoga instructor

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Spatial intelligence

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Ability to perceive the relationship between objects and how they move
in space

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Choreographer, sculptor, architect, aviator, sailor

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Interpersonal intelligence

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Ability to understand and be sensitive to the various emotional states
of others

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Counselor, social worker, salesperson

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Intrapersonal intelligence

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Ability to access personal feelings and motivations, and use them to
direct behavior and reach personal goals

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Key component of personal success over time

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Naturalist intelligence

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

High capacity to appreciate the natural world and interact with the
species within it

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Biologist, ecologist, environmentalist

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </tbody>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

Gardner’s theory is relatively new and needs additional research to
better establish empirical support. At the same time, his ideas
challenge the traditional idea of intelligence to include a wider
variety of abilities, although it has been suggested that Gardner simply
relabeled what other theorists called “cognitive styles” as
“intelligences” (Morgan, 1996). Furthermore, developing traditional
measures of Gardner’s intelligences is extremely difficult (Furnham,
2009; Gardner & Moran, 2006; Klein, 1997).

Gardner’s inter- and intrapersonal intelligences are often combined into
a single type: emotional intelligence. **Emotional intelligence**\ {:
data-type=“term”} encompasses the ability to understand the emotions of
yourself and others, show empathy, understand social relationships and
cues, and regulate your own emotions and respond in culturally
appropriate ways (Parker, Saklofske, & Stough, 2009). People with high
emotional intelligence typically have well-developed social skills. Some
researchers, including Daniel Goleman, the author of *Emotional
Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More than IQ*, argue that emotional
intelligence is a better predictor of success than traditional
intelligence (Goleman, 1995). However, emotional intelligence has been
widely debated, with researchers pointing out inconsistencies in how it
is defined and described, as well as questioning results of studies on a
subject that is difficulty to measure and study emperically (Locke,
2005; Mayer, Salovey, & Caruso, 2004)

Intelligence can also have different meanings and values in different
cultures. If you live on a small island, where most people get their
food by fishing from boats, it would be important to know how to fish
and how to repair a boat. If you were an exceptional angler, your peers
would probably consider you intelligent. If you were also skilled at
repairing boats, your intelligence might be known across the whole
island. Think about your own family’s culture. What values are important
for Latino families? Italian families? In Irish families, hospitality
and telling an entertaining story are marks of the culture. If you are a
skilled storyteller, other members of Irish culture are likely to
consider you intelligent.

Some cultures place a high value on working together as a collective. In
these cultures, the importance of the group supersedes the importance of
individual achievement. When you visit such a culture, how well you
relate to the values of that culture exemplifies your **cultural
intelligence**\ {: data-type=“term”}, sometimes referred to as cultural
competence.

CREATIVITY
==========

**Creativity**\ {: data-type=“term”} is the ability to generate, create,
or discover new ideas, solutions, and possibilities. Very creative
people often have intense knowledge about something, work on it for
years, look at novel solutions, seek out the advice and help of other
experts, and take risks. Although creativity is often associated with
the arts, it is actually a vital form of intelligence that drives people
in many disciplines to discover something new. Creativity can be found
in every area of life, from the way you decorate your residence to a new
way of understanding how a cell works.

Creativity is often assessed as a function of one’s ability to engage in
**divergent thinking**\ {: data-type=“term”}. Divergent thinking can be
described as thinking “outside the box;” it allows an individual to
arrive at unique, multiple solutions to a given problem. In contrast,
**convergent thinking**\ {: data-type=“term”} describes the ability to
provide a correct or well-established answer or solution to a problem
(Cropley, 2006; Gilford, 1967)

.. container:: psychology everyday-connection

   .. container::

      Creativity

   Dr. Tom Steitz, the Sterling Professor of Biochemistry and Biophysics
   at Yale University, has spent his career looking at the structure and
   specific aspects of RNA molecules and how their interactions could
   help produce antibiotics and ward off diseases. As a result of his
   lifetime of work, he won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2009. He
   wrote, “Looking back over the development and progress of my career
   in science, I am reminded how vitally important good mentorship is in
   the early stages of one's career development and constant
   face-to-face conversations, debate and discussions with colleagues at
   all stages of research. Outstanding discoveries, insights and
   developments do not happen in a vacuum” (Steitz, 2010, para. 39).
   Based on Steitz’s comment, it becomes clear that someone’s
   creativity, although an individual strength, benefits from
   interactions with others. Think of a time when your creativity was
   sparked by a conversation with a friend or classmate. How did that
   person influence you and what problem did you solve using creativity?

Summary
=======

Intelligence is a complex characteristic of cognition. Many theories
have been developed to explain what intelligence is and how it works.
Sternberg generated his triarchic theory of intelligence, whereas
Gardner posits that intelligence is comprised of many factors. Still
others focus on the importance of emotional intelligence. Finally,
creativity seems to be a facet of intelligence, but it is extremely
difficult to measure objectively.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Fluid intelligence is characterized by \________.

      1. being able to recall information
      2. being able to create new products
      3. being able to understand and communicate with different
         cultures
      4. being able to see complex relationships and solve problems {:
         type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which of the following is not one of Gardner’s Multiple
      Intelligences?

      1. creative
      2. spatial
      3. linguistic
      4. musical {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which theorist put forth the triarchic theory of intelligence?

      1. Goleman
      2. Gardner
      3. Sternberg
      4. Steitz {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      When you are examining data to look for trends, which type of
      intelligence are you using most?

      1. practical
      2. analytical
      3. emotional
      4. creative {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Describe a situation in which you would need to use practical
      intelligence.

   .. container::

      You are out with friends and it is getting late. You need to make
      it home before your curfew, but you don’t have a ride home. You
      need to get in touch with your parents, but your cell phone is
      dead. So, you enter a nearby convenience store and explain your
      situation to the clerk. He allows you to use the store’s phone to
      call your parents, and they come and pick you and your friends up,
      and take all of you home.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Describe a situation in which cultural intelligence would help you
      communicate better.

   .. container::

      You are visiting Madrid, Spain, on a language immersion trip. Your
      Spanish is okay, but you still not sure about some of the facial
      expressions and body language of the native speakers. When faced
      with a sticky social situation, you do not engage immediately as
      you might back home. Instead, you hold back and observe what
      others are doing before reacting.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      What influence do you think emotional intelligence plays in your
      personal life?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   analytical intelligence
      aligned with academic problem solving and computations ^
   convergent thinking
      providing correct or established answers to problems ^
   creative intelligence
      ability to produce new products, ideas, or inventing a new, novel
      solution to a problem ^
   creativity
      ability to generate, create, or discover new ideas, solutions, and
      possibilities ^
   crystallized intelligence
      characterized by acquired knowledge and the ability to retrieve it
      ^
   cultural intelligence
      ability with which people can understand and relate to those in
      another culture ^
   divergent thinking
      ability to think “outside the box” to arrive at novel solutions to
      a problem ^
   emotional intelligence
      ability to understand emotions and motivations in yourself and
      others ^
   fluid intelligence
      ability to see complex relationships and solve problems ^
   Multiple Intelligences Theory
      Gardner’s theory that each person possesses at least eight types
      of intelligence ^
   practical intelligence
      aka “street smarts” ^
   triarchic theory of intelligence
      Sternberg’s theory of intelligence; three facets of intelligence:
      practical, creative, and analytical

.. |Three boxes are arranged in a triangle. The top box contains “Analytical intelligence; academic problem solving and computation.” There is a line with arrows on both ends connecting this box to another box containing “Practical intelligence; street smarts and common sense.” Another line with arrows on both ends connects this box to another box containing “Creative intelligence; imaginative and innovative problem solving.” Another line with arrows on both ends connects this box to the first box described, completing the triangle.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_07_04_Triachic.jpg
