=================
What Is Learning?
=================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Explain how
   learned behaviors are different from instincts and reflexes \* Define
   learning \* Recognize and define three basic forms of
   learning—classical conditioning, operant conditioning, and
   observational learning

Birds build nests and migrate as winter approaches. Infants suckle at
their mother’s breast. Dogs shake water off wet fur. Salmon swim
upstream to spawn, and spiders spin intricate webs. What do these
seemingly unrelated behaviors have in common? They all are *unlearned*
behaviors. Both instincts and reflexes are innate behaviors that
organisms are born with. **Reflexes**\ {: data-type=“term”} are a motor
or neural reaction to a specific stimulus in the environment. They tend
to be simpler than instincts, involve the activity of specific body
parts and systems (e.g., the knee-jerk reflex and the contraction of the
pupil in bright light), and involve more primitive centers of the
central nervous system (e.g., the spinal cord and the medulla). In
contrast, **instincts**\ {: data-type=“term”} are innate behaviors that
are triggered by a broader range of events, such as aging and the change
of seasons. They are more complex patterns of behavior, involve movement
of the organism as a whole (e.g., sexual activity and migration), and
involve higher brain centers.

Both reflexes and instincts help an organism adapt to its environment
and do not have to be learned. For example, every healthy human baby has
a sucking reflex, present at birth. Babies are born knowing how to suck
on a nipple, whether artificial (from a bottle) or human. Nobody teaches
the baby to suck, just as no one teaches a sea turtle hatchling to move
toward the ocean. Learning, like reflexes and instincts, allows an
organism to adapt to its environment. But unlike instincts and reflexes,
learned behaviors involve change and experience: **learning**\ {:
data-type=“term”} is a relatively permanent change in behavior or
knowledge that results from experience. In contrast to the innate
behaviors discussed above, learning involves acquiring knowledge and
skills through experience. Looking back at our surfing scenario, Julian
will have to spend much more time training with his surfboard before he
learns how to ride the waves like his father.

Learning to surf, as well as any complex learning process (e.g.,
learning about the discipline of psychology), involves a complex
interaction of conscious and unconscious processes. Learning has
traditionally been studied in terms of its simplest components—the
associations our minds automatically make between events. Our minds have
a natural tendency to connect events that occur closely together or in
sequence. **Associative learning**\ {: data-type=“term”} occurs when an
organism makes connections between stimuli or events that occur together
in the environment. You will see that associative learning is central to
all three basic learning processes discussed in this chapter; classical
conditioning tends to involve unconscious processes, operant
conditioning tends to involve conscious processes, and observational
learning adds social and cognitive layers to all the basic associative
processes, both conscious and unconscious. These learning processes will
be discussed in detail later in the chapter, but it is helpful to have a
brief overview of each as you begin to explore how learning is
understood from a psychological perspective.

In classical conditioning, also known as Pavlovian conditioning,
organisms learn to associate events—or stimuli—that repeatedly happen
together. We experience this process throughout our daily lives. For
example, you might see a flash of lightning in the sky during a storm
and then hear a loud boom of thunder. The sound of the thunder naturally
makes you jump (loud noises have that effect by reflex). Because
lightning reliably predicts the impending boom of thunder, you may
associate the two and jump when you see lightning. Psychological
researchers study this associative process by focusing on what can be
seen and measured—behaviors. Researchers ask if one stimulus triggers a
reflex, can we train a different stimulus to trigger that same reflex?
In operant conditioning, organisms learn, again, to associate events—a
behavior and its consequence (reinforcement or punishment). A pleasant
consequence encourages more of that behavior in the future, whereas a
punishment deters the behavior. Imagine you are teaching your dog,
Hodor, to sit. You tell Hodor to sit, and give him a treat when he does.
After repeated experiences, Hodor begins to associate the act of sitting
with receiving a treat. He learns that the consequence of sitting is
that he gets a doggie biscuit (`[link] <#Figure06_01_Dog>`__).
Conversely, if the dog is punished when exhibiting a behavior, it
becomes conditioned to avoid that behavior (e.g., receiving a small
shock when crossing the boundary of an invisible electric fence).

|A photograph shows a dog standing at attention and smelling a treat in
a person’s hand.|\ {: #Figure06_01_Dog}

Observational learning extends the effective range of both classical and
operant conditioning. In contrast to classical and operant conditioning,
in which learning occurs only through direct experience, observational
learning is the process of watching others and then imitating what they
do. A lot of learning among humans and other animals comes from
observational learning. To get an idea of the extra effective range that
observational learning brings, consider Ben and his son Julian from the
introduction. How might observation help Julian learn to surf, as
opposed to learning by trial and error alone? By watching his father, he
can imitate the moves that bring success and avoid the moves that lead
to failure. Can you think of something you have learned how to do after
watching someone else?

All of the approaches covered in this chapter are part of a particular
tradition in psychology, called behaviorism, which we discuss in the
next section. However, these approaches do not represent the entire
study of learning. Separate traditions of learning have taken shape
within different fields of psychology, such as memory and cognition, so
you will find that other chapters will round out your understanding of
the topic. Over time these traditions tend to converge. For example, in
this chapter you will see how cognition has come to play a larger role
in behaviorism, whose more extreme adherents once insisted that
behaviors are triggered by the environment with no intervening thought.

Summary
=======

Instincts and reflexes are innate behaviors—they occur naturally and do
not involve learning. In contrast, learning is a change in behavior or
knowledge that results from experience. There are three main types of
learning: classical conditioning, operant conditioning, and
observational learning. Both classical and operant conditioning are
forms of associative learning where associations are made between events
that occur together. Observational learning is just as it sounds:
learning by observing others.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which of the following is an example of a reflex that occurs at
      some point in the development of a human being?

      1. child riding a bike
      2. teen socializing
      3. infant sucking on a nipple
      4. toddler walking {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      Learning is best defined as a relatively permanent change in
      behavior that \________.

      1. is innate
      2. occurs as a result of experience
      3. is found only in humans
      4. occurs by observing others {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      Two forms of associative learning are \_______\_ and \________.

      1. classical conditioning; operant conditioning
      2. classical conditioning; Pavlovian conditioning
      3. operant conditioning; observational learning
      4. operant conditioning; learning conditioning {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      In \_______\_ the stimulus or experience occurs before the
      behavior and then gets paired with the behavior.

      1. associative learning
      2. observational learning
      3. operant conditioning
      4. classical conditioning {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Compare and contrast classical and operant conditioning. How are
      they alike? How do they differ?

   .. container::

      Both classical and operant conditioning involve learning by
      association. In classical conditioning, responses are involuntary
      and automatic; however, responses are voluntary and learned in
      operant conditioning. In classical conditioning, the event that
      drives the behavior (the stimulus) comes before the behavior; in
      operant conditioning, the event that drives the behavior (the
      consequence) comes after the behavior. Also, whereas classical
      conditioning involves an organism forming an association between
      an involuntary (reflexive) response and a stimulus, operant
      conditioning involves an organism forming an association between a
      voluntary behavior and a consequence.

.. container::

   .. container::

      What is the difference between a reflex and a learned behavior?

   .. container::

      A reflex is a behavior that humans are born knowing how to do,
      such as sucking or blushing; these behaviors happen automatically
      in response to stimuli in the environment. Learned behaviors are
      things that humans are not born knowing how to do, such as
      swimming and surfing. Learned behaviors are not automatic; they
      occur as a result of practice or repeated experience in a
      situation.

Personal Application Questions
==============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      What is your personal definition of learning? How do your ideas
      about learning compare with the definition of learning presented
      in this text?

.. container::

   .. container::

      What kinds of things have you learned through the process of
      classical conditioning? Operant conditioning? Observational
      learning? How did you learn them?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   associative learning
      form of learning that involves connecting certain stimuli or
      events that occur together in the environment (classical and
      operant conditioning) ^
   instinct
      unlearned knowledge, involving complex patterns of behavior;
      instincts are thought to be more prevalent in lower animals than
      in humans ^
   learning
      change in behavior or knowledge that is the result of experience ^
   reflex
      unlearned, automatic response by an organism to a stimulus in the
      environment

.. |A photograph shows a dog standing at attention and smelling a treat in a person’s hand.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_06_01_Dog.jpg
