===========================
Sensation versus Perception
===========================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Distinguish
   between sensation and perception \* Describe the concepts of absolute
   threshold and difference threshold \* Discuss the roles attention,
   motivation, and sensory adaptation play in perception

SENSATION
=========

What does it mean to sense something? Sensory receptors are specialized
neurons that respond to specific types of stimuli. When sensory
information is detected by a sensory receptor, **sensation**\ {:
data-type=“term”} has occurred. For example, light that enters the eye
causes chemical changes in cells that line the back of the eye. These
cells relay messages, in the form of action potentials (as you learned
when studying biopsychology), to the central nervous system. The
conversion from sensory stimulus energy to action potential is known as
**transduction**\ {: data-type=“term”}.

You have probably known since elementary school that we have five
senses: vision, hearing (audition), smell (olfaction), taste
(gustation), and touch (somatosensation). It turns out that this notion
of five senses is oversimplified. We also have sensory systems that
provide information about balance (the vestibular sense), body position
and movement (proprioception and kinesthesia), pain (nociception), and
temperature (thermoception).

The sensitivity of a given sensory system to the relevant stimuli can be
expressed as an absolute threshold. **Absolute threshold**\ {:
data-type=“term”} refers to the minimum amount of stimulus energy that
must be present for the stimulus to be detected 50% of the time. Another
way to think about this is by asking how dim can a light be or how soft
can a sound be and still be detected half of the time. The sensitivity
of our sensory receptors can be quite amazing. It has been estimated
that on a clear night, the most sensitive sensory cells in the back of
the eye can detect a candle flame 30 miles away (Okawa & Sampath, 2007).
Under quiet conditions, the hair cells (the receptor cells of the inner
ear) can detect the tick of a clock 20 feet away (Galanter, 1962).

It is also possible for us to get messages that are presented below the
threshold for conscious awareness—these are called **subliminal
messages**\ {: data-type=“term”}. A stimulus reaches a physiological
threshold when it is strong enough to excite sensory receptors and send
nerve impulses to the brain: This is an absolute threshold. A message
below that threshold is said to be subliminal: We receive it, but we are
not consciously aware of it. Over the years there has been a great deal
of speculation about the use of subliminal messages in advertising, rock
music, and self-help audio programs. Research evidence shows that in
laboratory settings, people can process and respond to information
outside of awareness. But this does not mean that we obey these messages
like zombies; in fact, hidden messages have little effect on behavior
outside the laboratory (Kunst-Wilson & Zajonc, 1980; Rensink, 2004;
Nelson, 2008; Radel, Sarrazin, Legrain, & Gobancé, 2009; Loersch, Durso,
& Petty, 2013).

Absolute thresholds are generally measured under incredibly controlled
conditions in situations that are optimal for sensitivity. Sometimes, we
are more interested in how much difference in stimuli is required to
detect a difference between them. This is known as the **just noticeable
difference (jnd)**\ {: data-type=“term”} or **difference threshold**\ {:
data-type=“term”}. Unlike the absolute threshold, the difference
threshold changes depending on the stimulus intensity. As an example,
imagine yourself in a very dark movie theater. If an audience member
were to receive a text message on her cell phone which caused her screen
to light up, chances are that many people would notice the change in
illumination in the theater. However, if the same thing happened in a
brightly lit arena during a basketball game, very few people would
notice. The cell phone brightness does not change, but its ability to be
detected as a change in illumination varies dramatically between the two
contexts. Ernst Weber proposed this theory of change in difference
threshold in the 1830s, and it has become known as Weber’s law: The
difference threshold is a constant fraction of the original stimulus, as
the example illustrates.

PERCEPTION
==========

While our sensory receptors are constantly collecting information from
the environment, it is ultimately how we interpret that information that
affects how we interact with the world. **Perception**\ {:
data-type=“term”} refers to the way sensory information is organized,
interpreted, and consciously experienced. Perception involves both
bottom-up and top-down processing. **Bottom-up processing**\ {:
data-type=“term”} refers to the fact that perceptions are built from
sensory input. On the other hand, how we interpret those sensations is
influenced by our available knowledge, our experiences, and our
thoughts. This is called **top-down processing**\ {: data-type=“term”}.

One way to think of this concept is that sensation is a physical
process, whereas perception is psychological. For example, upon walking
into a kitchen and smelling the scent of baking cinnamon rolls, the
*sensation* is the scent receptors detecting the odor of cinnamon, but
the *perception* may be “Mmm, this smells like the bread Grandma used to
bake when the family gathered for holidays.”

Although our perceptions are built from sensations, not all sensations
result in perception. In fact, we often don’t perceive stimuli that
remain relatively constant over prolonged periods of time. This is known
as **sensory adaptation**\ {: data-type=“term”}. Imagine entering a
classroom with an old analog clock. Upon first entering the room, you
can hear the ticking of the clock; as you begin to engage in
conversation with classmates or listen to your professor greet the
class, you are no longer aware of the ticking. The clock is still
ticking, and that information is still affecting sensory receptors of
the auditory system. The fact that you no longer perceive the sound
demonstrates sensory adaptation and shows that while closely associated,
sensation and perception are different.

There is another factor that affects sensation and perception:
attention. Attention plays a significant role in determining what is
sensed versus what is perceived. Imagine you are at a party full of
music, chatter, and laughter. You get involved in an interesting
conversation with a friend, and you tune out all the background noise.
If someone interrupted you to ask what song had just finished playing,
you would probably be unable to answer that question.

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   See for yourself how inattentional blindness works by checking out
   this `selective attention test <http://openstax.org/l/blindness>`__
   from Simons and Chabris (1999).

One of the most interesting demonstrations of how important attention is
in determining our perception of the environment occurred in a famous
study conducted by Daniel Simons and Christopher Chabris (1999). In this
study, participants watched a video of people dressed in black and white
passing basketballs. Participants were asked to count the number of
times the team in white passed the ball. During the video, a person
dressed in a black gorilla costume walks among the two teams. You would
think that someone would notice the gorilla, right? Nearly half of the
people who watched the video didn’t notice the gorilla at all, despite
the fact that he was clearly visible for nine seconds. Because
participants were so focused on the number of times the white team was
passing the ball, they completely tuned out other visual information.
Failure to notice something that is completely visible because of a lack
of attention is called **inattentional blindness**\ {:
data-type=“term”}.

In a similar experiment, researchers tested inattentional blindness by
asking participants to observe images moving across a computer screen.
They were instructed to focus on either white or black objects,
disregarding the other color. When a red cross passed across the screen,
about one third of subjects did not notice it
(`[link] <#Figure_05_01_Cross>`__) (Most, Simons, Scholl, & Chabris,
2000).

|A photograph shows a person staring at a screen that displays one red
cross toward the left side and numerous black and white shapes all
over.|\ {: #Figure_05_01_Cross}

Motivation can also affect perception. Have you ever been expecting a
really important phone call and, while taking a shower, you think you
hear the phone ringing, only to discover that it is not? If so, then you
have experienced how motivation to detect a meaningful stimulus can
shift our ability to discriminate between a true sensory stimulus and
background noise. The ability to identify a stimulus when it is embedded
in a distracting background is called **signal detection theory**\ {:
data-type=“term”}. This might also explain why a mother is awakened by a
quiet murmur from her baby but not by other sounds that occur while she
is asleep. Signal detection theory has practical applications, such as
increasing air traffic controller accuracy. Controllers need to be able
to detect planes among many signals (blips) that appear on the radar
screen and follow those planes as they move through the sky. In fact,
the original work of the researcher who developed signal detection
theory was focused on improving the sensitivity of air traffic
controllers to plane blips (Swets, 1964).

Our perceptions can also be affected by our beliefs, values, prejudices,
expectations, and life experiences. As you will see later in this
chapter, individuals who are deprived of the experience of binocular
vision during critical periods of development have trouble perceiving
depth (Fawcett, Wang, & Birch, 2005). The shared experiences of people
within a given cultural context can have pronounced effects on
perception. For example, Marshall Segall, Donald Campbell, and Melville
Herskovits (1963) published the results of a multinational study in
which they demonstrated that individuals from Western **cultures**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} were more prone to experience certain
types of visual illusions than individuals from non-Western cultures,
and vice versa. One such illusion that Westerners were more likely to
experience was the **Müller-Lyer**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}
illusion (`[link] <#Figure_05_01_MullerLyer>`__): The lines appear to be
different lengths, but they are actually the same length.

|Two vertical lines are shown on the left in (a). They each have
V–shaped brackets on their ends, but one line has the brackets angled
toward its center, and the other has the brackets angled away from its
center. The lines are the same length, but the second line appears
longer due to the orientation of the brackets on its endpoints. To the
right of these lines is a two-dimensional drawing of walls meeting at
90-degree angles. Within this drawing are 2 lines which are the same
length, but appear different lengths. Because one line is bordering a
window on a wall that has the appearance of being farther away from the
perspective of the viewer, it appears shorter than the other line which
marks the 90 degree angle where the facing wall appears closer to the
viewer’s perspective point.|\ {: #Figure_05_01_MullerLyer}

These perceptual differences were consistent with differences in the
types of environmental features experienced on a regular basis by people
in a given cultural context. People in Western cultures, for example,
have a perceptual context of buildings with straight lines, what
Segall’s study called a carpentered world (Segall et al., 1966). In
contrast, people from certain non-Western cultures with an uncarpentered
view, such as the Zulu of South Africa, whose villages are made up of
round huts arranged in circles, are less susceptible to this illusion
(Segall et al., 1999). It is not just vision that is affected by
cultural factors. Indeed, research has demonstrated that the ability to
identify an odor, and rate its pleasantness and its intensity, varies
cross-culturally (Ayabe-Kanamura, Saito, Distel, Martínez-Gómez, &
Hudson, 1998).

Children described as thrill seekers are more likely to show taste
preferences for intense sour flavors (Liem, Westerbeek, Wolterink, Kok,
& de Graaf, 2004), which suggests that basic aspects of personality
might affect perception. Furthermore, individuals who hold positive
attitudes toward reduced-fat foods are more likely to rate foods labeled
as reduced fat as tasting better than people who have less positive
attitudes about these products (Aaron, Mela, & Evans, 1994).

Summary
=======

Sensation occurs when sensory receptors detect sensory stimuli.
Perception involves the organization, interpretation, and conscious
experience of those sensations. All sensory systems have both absolute
and difference thresholds, which refer to the minimum amount of stimulus
energy or the minimum amount of difference in stimulus energy required
to be detected about 50% of the time, respectively. Sensory adaptation,
selective attention, and signal detection theory can help explain what
is perceived and what is not. In addition, our perceptions are affected
by a number of factors, including beliefs, values, prejudices, culture,
and life experiences.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      \_______\_ refers to the minimum amount of stimulus energy
      required to be detected 50% of the time.

      1. absolute threshold
      2. difference threshold
      3. just noticeable difference
      4. transduction {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      Decreased sensitivity to an unchanging stimulus is known as
      \________.

      1. transduction
      2. difference threshold
      3. sensory adaptation
      4. inattentional blindness {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      \_______\_ involves the conversion of sensory stimulus energy into
      neural impulses.

      1. sensory adaptation
      2. inattentional blindness
      3. difference threshold
      4. transduction {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      \_______\_ occurs when sensory information is organized,
      interpreted, and consciously experienced.

      1. sensation
      2. perception
      3. transduction
      4. sensory adaptation {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

Critical Thinking Question
==========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Not everything that is sensed is perceived. Do you think there
      could ever be a case where something could be perceived without
      being sensed?

   .. container::

      This would be a good time for students to think about claims of
      extrasensory perception. Another interesting topic would be the
      phantom limb phenomenon experienced by amputees.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Please generate a novel example of how just noticeable difference
      can change as a function of stimulus intensity.

   .. container::

      There are many potential examples. One example involves the
      detection of weight differences. If two people are holding
      standard envelopes and one contains a quarter while the other is
      empty, the difference in weight between the two is easy to detect.
      However, if those envelopes are placed inside two textbooks of
      equal weight, the ability to discriminate which is heavier is much
      more difficult.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Think about a time when you failed to notice something around you
      because your attention was focused elsewhere. If someone pointed
      it out, were you surprised that you hadn’t noticed it right away?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   absolute threshold
      minimum amount of stimulus energy that must be present for the
      stimulus to be detected 50% of the time ^
   bottom-up processing
      system in which perceptions are built from sensory input ^
   inattentional blindness
      failure to notice something that is completely visible because of
      a lack of attention ^
   just noticeable difference
      difference in stimuli required to detect a difference between the
      stimuli ^
   perception
      way that sensory information is interpreted and consciously
      experienced ^
   sensation
      what happens when sensory information is detected by a sensory
      receptor ^
   sensory adaptation
      not perceiving stimuli that remain relatively constant over
      prolonged periods of time ^
   signal detection theory
      change in stimulus detection as a function of current mental state
      ^
   subliminal message
      message presented below the threshold of conscious awareness ^
   top-down processing
      interpretation of sensations is influenced by available knowledge,
      experiences, and thoughts ^
   transduction
      conversion from sensory stimulus energy to action potential

.. |A photograph shows a person staring at a screen that displays one red cross toward the left side and numerous black and white shapes all over.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_05_01_Cross.jpg
.. |Two vertical lines are shown on the left in (a). They each have V–shaped brackets on their ends, but one line has the brackets angled toward its center, and the other has the brackets angled away from its center. The lines are the same length, but the second line appears longer due to the orientation of the brackets on its endpoints. To the right of these lines is a two-dimensional drawing of walls meeting at 90-degree angles. Within this drawing are 2 lines which are the same length, but appear different lengths. Because one line is bordering a window on a wall that has the appearance of being farther away from the perspective of the viewer, it appears shorter than the other line which marks the 90 degree angle where the facing wall appears closer to the viewer’s perspective point.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_05_01_MullerLyer.jpg
