========================
Measures of Intelligence
========================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Explain how
   intelligence tests are developed \* Describe the history of the use
   of IQ tests \* Describe the purposes and benefits of intelligence
   testing

While you’re likely familiar with the term “IQ” and associate it with
the idea of intelligence, what does IQ really mean? IQ stands for
**intelligence quotient**\ {: data-type=“term”} and describes a score
earned on a test designed to measure intelligence. You’ve already
learned that there are many ways psychologists describe intelligence (or
more aptly, intelligences). Similarly, IQ tests—the tools designed to
measure intelligence—have been the subject of debate throughout their
development and use.

When might an IQ test be used? What do we learn from the results, and
how might people use this information? IQ tests are expensive to
administer and must be given by a licensed psychologist. Intelligence
testing has been considered both a bane and a boon for education and
social policy. In this section, we will explore what intelligence tests
measure, how they are scored, and how they were developed.

MEASURING INTELLIGENCE
======================

It seems that the human understanding of intelligence is somewhat
limited when we focus on traditional or academic-type intelligence. How
then, can intelligence be measured? And when we measure intelligence,
how do we ensure that we capture what we’re really trying to measure (in
other words, that IQ tests function as valid measures of intelligence)?
In the following paragraphs, we will explore the how intelligence tests
were developed and the history of their use.

The IQ test has been synonymous with intelligence for over a century. In
the late 1800s, Sir Francis Galton developed the first broad test of
intelligence (Flanagan & Kaufman, 2004). Although he was not a
psychologist, his contributions to the concepts of intelligence testing
are still felt today (Gordon, 1995). Reliable intelligence testing (you
may recall from earlier chapters that reliability refers to a test’s
ability to produce consistent results) began in earnest during the early
1900s with a researcher named Alfred Binet
(`[link] <#Figure_07_05_ChildIQ>`__). Binet was asked by the French
government to develop an intelligence test to use on children to
determine which ones might have difficulty in school; it included many
verbally based tasks. American researchers soon realized the value of
such testing. Louis Terman, a Stanford professor, modified Binet’s work
by standardizing the administration of the test and tested thousands of
different-aged children to establish an average score for each age. As a
result, the test was normed and standardized, which means that the test
was administered consistently to a large enough representative sample of
the population that the range of scores resulted in a bell curve (bell
curves will be discussed later). **Standardization**\ {:
data-type=“term”} means that the manner of administration, scoring, and
interpretation of results is consistent. **Norming**\ {:
data-type=“term”} involves giving a test to a large population so data
can be collected comparing groups, such as age groups. The resulting
data provide norms, or referential scores, by which to interpret future
scores. Norms are not expectations of what a given group should know but
a demonstration of what that group does know. Norming and standardizing
the test ensures that new scores are reliable. This new version of the
test was called the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale (Terman, 1916).
Remarkably, an updated version of this test is still widely used today.

|Photograph A shows a portrait of Alfred Binet. Photograph B shows six
sketches of human faces. Above these faces is the label “Guide for
Binet-Simon Scale. 223” The faces are arranged in three rows of two, and
these rows are labeled “1, 2, and 3.” At the bottom it reads: “The
psychological clinic is indebted for the loan of these cuts and those on
p. 225 to the courtesy of Dr. Oliver P. Cornman, Associate
Superintendent of Schools of Philadelphia, and Chairman of Committee on
Backward Children Investigation. See Report of Committee, Dec. 31, 1910,
appendix.”|\ {: #Figure_07_05_ChildIQ}

In 1939, David Wechsler, a psychologist who spent part of his career
working with World War I veterans, developed a new IQ test in the United
States. Wechsler combined several subtests from other intelligence tests
used between 1880 and World War I. These subtests tapped into a variety
of verbal and nonverbal skills, because Wechsler believed that
intelligence encompassed “the global capacity of a person to act
purposefully, to think rationally, and to deal effectively with his
environment” (Wechsler, 1958, p. 7). He named the test the
Wechsler-Bellevue Intelligence Scale (Wechsler, 1981). This combination
of subtests became one of the most extensively used intelligence tests
in the history of psychology. Although its name was later changed to the
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) and has been revised several
times, the aims of the test remain virtually unchanged since its
inception (Boake, 2002). Today, there are three intelligence tests
credited to Wechsler, the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-fourth
edition (WAIS-IV), the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children
(WISC-V), and the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of
Intelligence—IV (WPPSI-IV) (Wechsler, 2012). These tests are used widely
in schools and communities throughout the United States, and they are
periodically normed and standardized as a means of recalibration.
Interestingly, the periodic recalibrations have led to an interesting
observation known as the Flynn effect. Named after James Flynn, who was
among the first to describe this trend, the **Flynn effect**\ {:
data-type=“term”} refers to the observation that each generation has a
significantly higher IQ than the last. Flynn himself argues, however,
that increased IQ scores do not necessarily mean that younger
generations are more intelligent per se (Flynn, Shaughnessy, & Fulgham,
2012). As a part of the recalibration process, the WISC-V was given to
thousands of children across the country, and children taking the test
today are compared with their same-age peers
(`[link] <#Figure_07_05_ChildIQ>`__).

The WISC-V is composed of 14 subtests, which comprise five indices,
which then render an IQ score. The five indices are Verbal
Comprehension, Visual Spatial, Fluid Reasoning, Working Memory, and
Processing Speed. When the test is complete, individuals receive a score
for each of the five indices and a Full Scale IQ score. The method of
scoring reflects the understanding that intelligence is comprised of
multiple abilities in several cognitive realms and focuses on the mental
processes that the child used to arrive at his or her answers to each
test item.

Ultimately, we are still left with the question of how valid
intelligence tests are. Certainly, the most modern versions of these
tests tap into more than verbal competencies, yet the specific skills
that should be assessed in IQ testing, the degree to which any test can
truly measure an individual’s intelligence, and the use of the results
of IQ tests are still issues of debate (Gresham & Witt, 1997; Flynn,
Shaughnessy, & Fulgham, 2012; Richardson, 2002; Schlinger, 2003).

.. container:: psychology what-do-you-think

   .. container::

      Intellectually Disabled Criminals and Capital Punishment

   The case of *Atkins v. Virginia* was a landmark case in the United
   States Supreme Court. On August 16, 1996, two men, Daryl Atkins and
   William Jones, robbed, kidnapped, and then shot and killed Eric
   Nesbitt, a local airman from the U.S. Air Force. A clinical
   psychologist evaluated Atkins and testified at the trial that Atkins
   had an IQ of 59. The mean IQ score is 100. The psychologist concluded
   that Atkins was mildly mentally retarded.

   The jury found Atkins guilty, and he was sentenced to death. Atkins
   and his attorneys appealed to the Supreme Court. In June 2002, the
   Supreme Court reversed a previous decision and ruled that executions
   of mentally retarded criminals are ‘cruel and unusual punishments’
   prohibited by the Eighth Amendment. The court wrote in their
   decision:

      Clinical definitions of mental retardation require not only
      subaverage intellectual functioning, but also significant
      limitations in adaptive skills. Mentally retarded persons
      frequently know the difference between right and wrong and are
      competent to stand trial. Because of their impairments, however,
      by definition they have diminished capacities to understand and
      process information, to communicate, to abstract from mistakes and
      learn from experience, to engage in logical reasoning, to control
      impulses, and to understand others’ reactions. Their deficiencies
      do not warrant an exemption from criminal sanctions, but diminish
      their personal culpability (*Atkins v. Virginia*, 2002, par. 5).

   The court also decided that there was a state legislature consensus
   against the execution of the mentally retarded and that this
   consensus should stand for all of the states. The Supreme Court
   ruling left it up to the states to determine their own definitions of
   mental retardation and intellectual disability. The definitions vary
   among states as to who can be executed. In the Atkins case, a jury
   decided that because he had many contacts with his lawyers and thus
   was provided with intellectual stimulation, his IQ had reportedly
   increased, and he was now smart enough to be executed. He was given
   an execution date and then received a stay of execution after it was
   revealed that lawyers for co-defendant, William Jones, coached Jones
   to “produce a testimony against Mr. Atkins that did match the
   evidence” (Liptak, 2008). After the revelation of this misconduct,
   Atkins was re-sentenced to life imprisonment.

   *Atkins v. Virginia* (2002) highlights several issues regarding
   society’s beliefs around intelligence. In the Atkins case, the
   Supreme Court decided that intellectual disability *does* affect
   decision making and therefore should affect the nature of the
   punishment such criminals receive. Where, however, should the lines
   of intellectual disability be drawn? In May 2014, the Supreme Court
   ruled in a related case (*Hall v. Florida*) that IQ scores cannot be
   used as a final determination of a prisoner’s eligibility for the
   death penalty (Roberts, 2014).

THE BELL CURVE
==============

The results of intelligence tests follow the bell curve, a graph in the
general shape of a bell. When the bell curve is used in psychological
testing, the graph demonstrates a normal distribution of a trait, in
this case, intelligence, in the human population. Many human traits
naturally follow the bell curve. For example, if you lined up all your
female schoolmates according to height, it is likely that a large
cluster of them would be the average height for an American woman:
5’4”–5’6”. This cluster would fall in the center of the bell curve,
representing the average height for American women
(`[link] <#Figure_07_05_Bell>`__). There would be fewer women who stand
closer to 4’11”. The same would be true for women of above-average
height: those who stand closer to 5’11”. The trick to finding a bell
curve in nature is to use a large sample size. Without a large sample
size, it is less likely that the bell curve will represent the wider
population. A **representative sample**\ {: data-type=“term”} is a
subset of the population that accurately represents the general
population. If, for example, you measured the height of the women in
your classroom only, you might not actually have a representative
sample. Perhaps the women’s basketball team wanted to take this course
together, and they are all in your class. Because basketball players
tend to be taller than average, the women in your class may not be a
good representative sample of the population of American women. But if
your sample included all the women at your school, it is likely that
their heights would form a natural bell curve.

|A graph of a bell curve is labeled “Height of U.S. Women.” The x axis
is labeled “Height” and the y axis is labeled “Frequency.” Between the
heights of five feet tall and five feet and five inches tall, the
frequency rises to a curved peak, then begins dropping off at the same
rate until it hits five feet ten inches tall.|\ {: #Figure_07_05_Bell}

The same principles apply to intelligence tests scores. Individuals earn
a score called an intelligence quotient (IQ). Over the years, different
types of IQ tests have evolved, but the way scores are interpreted
remains the same. The average IQ score on an IQ test is 100. **Standard
deviations**\ {: data-type=“term”} describe how data are dispersed in a
population and give context to large data sets. The bell curve uses the
standard deviation to show how all scores are dispersed from the average
score (`[link] <#Figure_07_05_Bell2>`__). In modern IQ testing, one
standard deviation is 15 points. So a score of 85 would be described as
“one standard deviation below the mean.” How would you describe a score
of 115 and a score of 70? Any IQ score that falls within one standard
deviation above and below the mean (between 85 and 115) is considered
average, and 68% of the population has IQ scores in this range. An IQ
score of 130 or above is considered a superior level.

|A graph of a bell curve is labeled “Intelligence Quotient Score.” The x
axis is labeled “IQ,” and the y axis is labeled “Population.” Beginning
at an IQ of 60, the population rises to a curved peak at an IQ of 100
and then drops off at the same rate ending near zero at an IQ of
140.|\ {: #Figure_07_05_Bell2}

Only 2.2% of the population has an IQ score below 70 (American
Psychological Association [APA], 2013). A score of 70 or below indicates
significant cognitive delays. When these are combined with major
deficits in adaptive functioning, a person is diagnosed with having an
intellectual disability (American Association on Intellectual and
Developmental Disabilities, 2013). Formerly known as mental retardation,
the accepted term now is intellectual disability, and it has four
subtypes: mild, moderate, severe, and profound
(`[link] <#Table_07_05_01>`__). *The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Psychological Disorders* lists criteria for each subgroup (APA,
2013).

.. raw:: html

   <table id="Table_07_05_01" summary="A three column table describes characteristics of cognitive disorders. From left to right, the columns are labeled: “Intellectual disability subtype; Percentage of intellectually disabled population; and description.” The first row, respectively, reads: “mild; 85%; and third grade to sixth grade skill level in reading, writing, and math. May be employed and live independently.” The second row reads: “moderate; 10%; and basic reading and writing skills, functional self-care">

.. raw:: html

   <caption>

Characteristics of Cognitive Disorders

.. raw:: html

   </caption>

.. raw:: html

   <thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Intellectual Disability Subtype

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Percentage of Intellectually Disabled Population

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Description

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tbody>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Mild

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

85%

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

3rd- to 6th-grade skill level in reading, writing, and math; may be
employed and live independently

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Moderate

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

10%

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Basic reading and writing skills; functional self-care skills; requires
some oversight

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Severe

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

5%

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Functional self-care skills; requires oversight of daily environment and
activities

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Profound

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

<1%

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

May be able to communicate verbally or nonverbally; requires intensive
oversight

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </tbody>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

On the other end of the intelligence spectrum are those individuals
whose IQs fall into the highest ranges. Consistent with the bell curve,
about 2% of the population falls into this category. People are
considered gifted if they have an IQ score of 130 or higher, or superior
intelligence in a particular area. Long ago, popular belief suggested
that people of high intelligence were maladjusted. This idea was
disproven through a groundbreaking study of gifted children. In 1921,
Lewis Terman began a longitudinal study of over 1500 children with IQs
over 135 (Terman, 1925). His findings showed that these children became
well-educated, successful adults who were, in fact, well-adjusted
(Terman & Oden, 1947). Additionally, Terman’s study showed that the
subjects were above average in physical build and attractiveness,
dispelling an earlier popular notion that highly intelligent people were
“weaklings.” Some people with very high IQs elect to join Mensa, an
organization dedicated to identifying, researching, and fostering
intelligence. Members must have an IQ score in the top 2% of the
population, and they may be required to pass other exams in their
application to join the group.

.. container:: psychology dig-deeper

   .. container::

      What’s in a Name? Mental Retardation

   In the past, individuals with IQ scores below 70 and significant
   adaptive and social functioning delays were diagnosed with mental
   retardation. When this diagnosis was first named, the title held no
   social stigma. In time, however, the degrading word “retard” sprang
   from this diagnostic term. “Retard” was frequently used as a taunt,
   especially among young people, until the words “mentally retarded”
   and “retard” became an insult. As such, the DSM-5 now labels this
   diagnosis as “intellectual disability.” Many states once had a
   Department of Mental Retardation to serve those diagnosed with such
   cognitive delays, but most have changed their name to Department of
   Developmental Disabilities or something similar in language. The
   Social Security Administration still uses the term “mental
   retardation” but is considering eliminating it from its programming
   (Goad, 2013). Earlier in the chapter, we discussed how language
   affects how we think. Do you think changing the title of this
   department has any impact on how people regard those with
   developmental disabilities? Does a different name give people more
   dignity, and if so, how? Does it change the expectations for those
   with developmental or cognitive disabilities? Why or why not?

WHY MEASURE INTELLIGENCE?
=========================

The value of IQ testing is most evident in educational or clinical
settings. Children who seem to be experiencing learning difficulties or
severe behavioral problems can be tested to ascertain whether the
child’s difficulties can be partly attributed to an IQ score that is
significantly different from the mean for her age group. Without IQ
testing—or another measure of intelligence—children and adults needing
extra support might not be identified effectively. In addition, IQ
testing is used in courts to determine whether a defendant has special
or extenuating circumstances that preclude him from participating in
some way in a trial. People also use IQ testing results to seek
disability benefits from the Social Security Administration. While IQ
tests have sometimes been used as arguments in support of insidious
purposes, such as the eugenics movement (Severson, 2011), the following
case study demonstrates the usefulness and benefits of IQ testing.

Candace, a 14-year-old girl experiencing problems at school, was
referred for a court-ordered psychological evaluation. She was in
regular education classes in ninth grade and was failing every subject.
Candace had never been a stellar student but had always been passed to
the next grade. Frequently, she would curse at any of her teachers who
called on her in class. She also got into fights with other students and
occasionally shoplifted. When she arrived for the evaluation, Candace
immediately said that she hated everything about school, including the
teachers, the rest of the staff, the building, and the homework. Her
parents stated that they felt their daughter was picked on, because she
was of a different race than the teachers and most of the other
students. When asked why she cursed at her teachers, Candace replied,
“They only call on me when I don’t know the answer. I don’t want to say,
‘I don’t know’ all of the time and look like an idiot in front of my
friends. The teachers embarrass me.” She was given a battery of tests,
including an IQ test. Her score on the IQ test was 68. What does
Candace’s score say about her ability to excel or even succeed in
regular education classes without assistance?

Summary
=======

In this section, we learned about the history of intelligence testing
and some of the challenges regarding intelligence testing. Intelligence
tests began in earnest with Binet; Wechsler later developed intelligence
tests that are still in use today: the WAIS-IV and WISC-V. The Bell
curve shows the range of scores that encompass average intelligence as
well as standard deviations.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      In order for a test to be normed and standardized it must be
      tested on \________.

      1. a group of same-age peers
      2. a representative sample
      3. children with mental disabilities
      4. children of average intelligence {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      The mean score for a person with an average IQ is \________.

      1. 70
      2. 130
      3. 85
      4. 100 {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      Who developed the IQ test most widely used today?

      1. Sir Francis Galton
      2. Alfred Binet
      3. Louis Terman
      4. David Wechsler {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      The DSM-5 now uses \_______\_ as a diagnostic label for what was
      once referred to as mental retardation.

      1. autism and developmental disabilities
      2. lowered intelligence
      3. intellectual disability
      4. cognitive disruption {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Why do you think different theorists have defined intelligence in
      different ways?

   .. container::

      Since cognitive processes are complex, ascertaining them in a
      measurable way is challenging. Researchers have taken different
      approaches to define intelligence in an attempt to comprehensively
      describe and measure it.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Compare and contrast the benefits of the Stanford-Binet IQ test
      and Wechsler’s IQ tests.

   .. container::

      The Wechsler-Bellevue IQ test combined a series of subtests that
      tested verbal and nonverbal skills into a single IQ test in order
      to get a reliable, descriptive score of intelligence. While the
      Stanford-Binet test was normed and standardized, it focused more
      on verbal skills than variations in other cognitive processes.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      In thinking about the case of Candace described earlier, do you
      think that Candace benefitted or suffered as a result of
      consistently being passed on to the next grade?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   Flynn effect
      observation that each generation has a significantly higher IQ
      than the previous generation ^
   intelligence quotient
      (also, IQ) score on a test designed to measure intelligence ^
   norming
      administering a test to a large population so data can be
      collected to reference the normal scores for a population and its
      groups ^
   representative sample
      subset of the population that accurately represents the general
      population ^
   standard deviation
      measure of variability that describes the difference between a set
      of scores and their mean ^
   standardization
      method of testing in which administration, scoring, and
      interpretation of results are consistent

.. |Photograph A shows a portrait of Alfred Binet. Photograph B shows six sketches of human faces. Above these faces is the label “Guide for Binet-Simon Scale. 223” The faces are arranged in three rows of two, and these rows are labeled “1, 2, and 3.” At the bottom it reads: “The psychological clinic is indebted for the loan of these cuts and those on p. 225 to the courtesy of Dr. Oliver P. Cornman, Associate Superintendent of Schools of Philadelphia, and Chairman of Committee on Backward Children Investigation. See Report of Committee, Dec. 31, 1910, appendix.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_07_05_ChildIQ.jpg
.. |A graph of a bell curve is labeled “Height of U.S. Women.” The x axis is labeled “Height” and the y axis is labeled “Frequency.” Between the heights of five feet tall and five feet and five inches tall, the frequency rises to a curved peak, then begins dropping off at the same rate until it hits five feet ten inches tall.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_07_05_BellCurve1.jpg
.. |A graph of a bell curve is labeled “Intelligence Quotient Score.” The x axis is labeled “IQ,” and the y axis is labeled “Population.” Beginning at an IQ of 60, the population rises to a curved peak at an IQ of 100 and then drops off at the same rate ending near zero at an IQ of 140.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_07_05_BellCurve2.jpg
