============
Introduction
============



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

class=“introduction”

class=“summary” title=“Summary”

class=“review-questions” title=“Review Questions”

class=“critical-thinking” title=“Critical Thinking Questions”

class=“personal-application” title=“Personal Application Questions”

class=“references” title=“References”

|Three side by side images are shown. On the left is a person lying in
the grass with a book, looking off into the distance. In the middle is a
sculpture of a person sitting on rock, with chin rested on hand, and the
elbow of that hand rested on knee. The third is a drawing of a person
sitting cross-legged with his head resting on his hand, elbow on
knee.|\ {: #Figure_07_00_Thinking}

Why is it so difficult to break habits—like reaching for your ringing
phone even when you shouldn’t, such as when you’re driving? How does a
person who has never seen or touched snow in real life develop an
understanding of the concept of snow? How do young children acquire the
ability to learn language with no formal instruction? Psychologists who
study thinking explore questions like these.

Cognitive psychologists also study intelligence. What is intelligence,
and how does it vary from person to person? Are “street smarts” a kind
of intelligence, and if so, how do they relate to other types of
intelligence? What does an IQ test really measure? These questions and
more will be explored in this chapter as you study thinking and
intelligence.

In other chapters, we discussed the cognitive processes of perception,
learning, and memory. In this chapter, we will focus on high-level
cognitive processes. As a part of this discussion, we will consider
thinking and briefly explore the development and use of language. We
will also discuss problem solving and creativity before ending with a
discussion of how intelligence is measured and how our biology and
environments interact to affect intelligence. After finishing this
chapter, you will have a greater appreciation of the higher-level
cognitive processes that contribute to our distinctiveness as a species.

References
==========

Abler, W. (2013). Sapir, Harris, and Chomsky in the twentieth century.
*Cognitive Critique, 7*, 29–48.

American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities.
(2013). *Definition of intellectual disability*. Retrieved from
http://aaidd.org/intellectual-disability/definition#.UmkR2xD2Bh4

American Psychological Association. (2013). In *Diagnostic and
statistical manual of psychological disorders* (5th ed., pp. 34–36).
Washington, D. C.: American Psychological Association.

Aronson, E. (Ed.). (1995). Social cognition. In *The social animal*
(p. 151). New York: W.H. Freeman and Company.

*Atkins v. Virginia*, 00-8452 (2002).

Bartels, M., Rietveld, M., Van Baal, G., & Boomsma, D. I. (2002).
Genetic and environmental influences on the development of intelligence.
*Behavior Genetics, 32*\ (4), 237–238.

Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: A study in experimental and social
psychology. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Bayer, J. B., & Campbell, S. W. (2012). Texting while driving on
automatic: Considering the frequency-independent side of habit.
*Computers in Human Behavior, 28*, 2083–2090.

Barton, S. M. (2003). Classroom accommodations for students with
dyslexia. *Learning Disabilities Journal, 13*, 10–14.

Berlin, B., & Kay, P. (1969). *Basic color terms: Their universality and
evolution.* Berkley: University of California Press.

Berninger, V. W. (2008). Defining and differentiating dysgraphia,
dyslexia, and language learning disability within a working memory
model. In M. Mody & E. R. Silliman (Eds.), Brain, behavior, and learning
in language and reading disorders (pp. 103–134). New York: The Guilford
Press.

Blossom, M., & Morgan, J. L. (2006). Does the face say what the mouth
says? A study of infants’ sensitivity to visual prosody. In the 30th
annual Boston University Conference on Language Development, Somerville,
MA.

Boake, C. (2002, May 24). From the Binet-Simon to the Wechsler-Bellevue:
Tracing the history of intelligence testing. *Journal of Clinical and
Experimental Neuropsychology, 24*\ (3)\ *,* 383–405.

Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought? Mandarin and English
speakers’ conceptions of time. Cognitive Psychology, 43, 1–22.

Boroditsky, L. (2011, February). How language shapes thought.
*Scientific American*, 63–65.**Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory
of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press

Bouchard, T. J., Lykken, D. T., McGue, M., Segal, N. L., & Tellegen, A.
(1990). Sources of human psychological differences: The Minnesota Study
of Twins Reared Apart. *Science, 250*, 223–228.

Cairns Regional Council. (n.d.). Cultural greetings. Retrieved from
http://www.cairns.qld.gov.au/\_\_data/assets/pdf\_file/0007/8953/CulturalGreetingExercise.pdf

Callero, P. L. (1994). From role-playing to role-using: Understanding
role as resource. *Social Psychology Quarterly, 57*, 228–243.

Cattell, R. (1963). Theory of fluid and crystallized intelligence: A
critical experiment. *Journal of Educational Psychology, 54*\ (1), 1–22.

Cianciolo, A. T., & Sternberg, R. J. (2004). Intelligence: A brief
history. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.

Chomsky, N.(1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press

Corballis, M. C., & Suddendorf, T. (2007). Memory, time, and language.
In C. Pasternak (Ed.), What makes us human (pp. 17–36). Oxford, UK:
Oneworld Publications.

Constitutional Rights Foundation. (2013). Gandhi and civil disobedience.
Retrieved from
http://www.crf-usa.org/black-history-month/gandhi-and-civil-disobedience

Cropley, A. (2006). In praise of convergent thinking. *Creativity
Research Journal, 18*\ (3), 391–404.

Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Csikszentmihalyi, I. (1993). Family influences
on the development of giftedness. *Ciba Foundation Symposium*, *178*,
187–206.

Curtiss, S. (1981). Dissociations between language and cognition: Cases
and implications. *Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
11*\ (1), 15–30.

Cyclopedia of Puzzles. (n.d.) Retrieved from
http://www.mathpuzzle.com/loyd/

Dates and Events. (n.d.). *Oprah Winfrey timeline*. Retrieved from
http://www.datesandevents.org/people-timelines/05-oprah-winfrey-timeline.htm

Fernández, E. M., & Cairns, H. S. (2011). Fundamentals of
psycholinguistics. West Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.

Flanagan, D., & Kaufman, A. (2004). *Essentials of WISC-IV assessment.*
Hoboken: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.

Flynn, J., Shaughnessy, M. F., & Fulgham, S. W. (2012) Interview with
Jim Flynn about the Flynn effect. *North American Journal of Psychology,
14*\ (1), 25–38.

Fox, M. (2012, November 1). Arthur R. Jensen dies at 89; Set off debate
about I.Q. *New York Times*, p. B15.

Fromkin, V., Krashen, S., Curtiss, S., Rigler, D., & Rigler, M. (1974).
The development of language in Genie: A case of language acquisition
beyond the critical period. *Brain and Language, 1*, 81–107.

Furnham, A. (2009). The validity of a new, self-report measure of
multiple intelligence. *Current Psychology: A Journal for Diverse
Perspectives on Diverse Psychological Issues, 28*, 225–239.

Gardner, H. (1983). *Frames of mind: The theory of multiple
intelligences.* New York: Basic Books.

Gardner, H., & Moran, S. (2006). The science of multiple intelligences
theory: A response to Lynn Waterhouse. *Educational Psychologist, 41*,
227–232.

German, T. P., & Barrett, H. C. (2005). Functional fixedness in a
technologically sparse culture. *Psychological Science*, 16, 1–5.

Goad, B. (2013, January 25). SSA wants to stop calling people 'mentally
retarded.’ Retrieved from
http://thehill.com/blogs/regwatch/pending-regs/279399-ssa-wants-to-stop-calling-people-mentally-retarded

Goldstone, R. L., & Kersten, A. (2003). Concepts and categorization. In
A. F. Healy, R. W. Proctor, & I.B. Weiner (Eds.), *Handbook of
psychology* (Volume IV, pp. 599–622). Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.

Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional intelligence; Why it can matter more than
IQ. New York: Bantam Books.

Gordon, O. E. (1995). *Francis Galton (1822–1911)*. Retrieved from
http://www.psych.utah.edu/gordon/Classes/Psy4905Docs/PsychHistory/Cards/Galton.html

Gresham, F. M., & Witt, J. C. (1997). Utility of intelligence tests for
treatment planning, classification, and placement decisions: Recent
empirical findings and future directions. *School Psychology Quarterly,
12*\ (3), 249–267.

Guilford, J. P. (1967). The nature of human intelligence. New York, NY:
McGraw Hill.

Heaton, S. (2004). Making the switch: Unlocking the mystery of the
WISC-IV. *Case Conference.* University of Florida.

Jensen, J. (2011). Phoneme acquisition: Infants and second language
learners. *The Language Teacher, 35*\ (6), 24–28.

Johnson, J. S., & Newport, E. L. (1989). Critical period effects in
second language learning: The influence of maturational state on the
acquisition of English as a second language. *Cognitive Psychology, 21*,
60–99.

Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. New York: Farrar, Straus,
and Giroux.

Kishyama, M. M., Boyce, W. T., Jimenez, A. M., Perry, L. M., & Knight,
R. T. (2009). Socioeconomic disparities affect prefrontal function in
children. *Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21*\ (6), 1106–1115.

Klein, P. D. (1997). Multiplying the problems of intelligence by eight:
A critique of Gardner’s theory. Canadian Journal of Education, 22,
377-94.

*Larry P v. Riles*, C-71-2270 RFP. (1979).

Lenneberg, E. (1967). Biological foundations of language. New York:
Wiley.

Liptak, A. (2008, January 19). Lawyer reveals secret, toppling death
sentence. *New York Times*. Retrieved from
http://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/19/us/19death.html?\_r=0

Locke, E. A. (2005, April 14). Why emotional intelligence is an invalid
concept. *Journal of Organizational Behavior, 26*, 425–431.

Mayer, J. D., Salovey, P., & Caruso, D. (2004). Emotional intelligence:
Theory, findings, and implications, *Psychological Inquiry, 15*\ (3),
197–215.

Modgil, S., & Routledge, C. M. (Eds.). (1987). *Arthur Jensen: Consensus
and controversy.* New York: Falmer Press.

Morgan, H. (1996). An analysis of Gardner’s theory of multiple
intelligence. *Roeper Review: A Journal on Gifted Education, 18*,
263–269.

Moskowitz, B. A. (1978). The acquisition of language\ *. Scientific
American, 239*, 92–108. Petitto, L. A., Holowka, S., Sergio, L. E.,
Levy, B., & Ostry, D. J. (2004). Baby hands that move to the rhythm of
language: Hearing babies acquiring sign languages babble silently on the
hands. *Cognition, 93*, 43–73.

Neyfakh, L. (2013, October 7). “Why you can’t stop checking your phone.”
Retrieved from
http://www.bostonglobe.com/ideas/2013/10/06/why-you-can-stop-checking-your-phone/rrBJzyBGDAr1YlEH5JQDcM/story.html

Parker, J. D., Saklofske, D. H., & Stough, C. (Eds.). (2009). *Assessing
emotional intelligence: Theory, research, and applications.* New York:
Springer.

Petitto, L. A., Holowka, S., Sergio, L. E., Levy, B., & Ostry, D. J.
(2004). Baby hands that move to the rhythm of language: Hearing babies
acquiring sign languages babble silently on the hands. Cognition, 93,
43–73.

Pickens, J. (1994). Full-term and preterm infants’ perception of
face-voice synchrony. *Infant Behavior and Development, 17*, 447–455.

Pratkanis, A. (1989). The cognitive representation of attitudes. In A.
R. Pratkanis, S. J. Breckler, & A. G. Greenwald (Eds.), *Attitude
structure and function* (pp. 71–98). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Regier, T., & Kay, P. (2009). Language, thought, and color: Whorf was
half right. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13*\ (10), 439–446.

Riccio, C. A., Gonzales, J. J., & Hynd, G. W. (1994). Attention-deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and learning disabilities. *Learning
Disability Quarterly, 17*, 311–322.

Richardson, K. (2002). What IQ tests test. *Theory & Psychology,
12*\ (3), 283–314.

Roberts, D. (2014, May 27). U.S. Supreme Court bars Florida from using
IQ score cutoff for executions. The Guardian. Retrieved from
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/27/us-supreme-court-iq-score-cutoff-florida-execution

Rushton, J. P., & Jensen, A. R. (2005). Thirty years of research on race
differences in cognitive ability. *Psychology, public policy, and law,
11*\ (2), 235–294.

Rymer, R. (1993). *Genie: A Scientific Tragedy.* New York: Harper
Collins.

Sapir, E. (1964). Culture, language, and personality. Berkley:
University of California Press. (Original work published 1941)

Schlinger, H. D. (2003). The myth of intelligence. *The Psychological
Record, 53*\ (1), 15–32.

Severson, K. (2011, December 9). Thousands sterilized, a state weighs
restitution. The New York Times. Retrieved from
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/10/us/redress-weighed-for-forced-sterilizations-in-north-carolina.html?pagewanted=all&\_r=0

Singleton, D. M. (1995). Introduction: A critical look at the critical
period hypothesis in second language acquisition research. In D.M.
Singleton & Z. Lengyel (Eds.), The age factor in second language
acquisition: A critical look at the critical period hypothesis in second
language acquisition research (pp. 1–29). Avon, UK: Multilingual Matters
Ltd.

Skinner, B. F. (1957). Verbal behavior. Acton, MA: Copley Publishing
Group.

Smits-Engelsman, B. C. M., & Van Galen, G. P. (1997). Dysgraphia in
children: Lasting psychomotor deficiency or transient developmental
delay? *Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 67*, 164–184.

Spelke, E. S., & Cortelyou, A. (1981). Perceptual aspects of social
knowing: Looking and listening in infancy. In M.E. Lamb & L.R. Sherrod
(Eds.), Infant social cognition: Empirical and theoretical
considerations (pp. 61–83). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Steitz, T. (2010). *Thomas A. Steitz – Biographical.* (K. Grandin, Ed.)
Retrieved from
http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel\_prizes/chemistry/laureates/2009/steitz-bio.html

Sternberg, R. J. (1988). The triarchic mind: A new theory of
intelligence. New York: Viking-Penguin.

Terman, L. M. (1925). *Mental and physical traits of a thousand gifted
children (I)*. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Terman, L. M., & Oden, M. H. (1947). *The gifted child grows up: 25
years’ follow-up of a superior group: Genetic studies of genius (Vol.
4)*. Standord, CA: Stanford University Press.

Terman, L. M. (1916). *The measurement of intelligence.* Boston:
Houghton-Mifflin.

Tomasello, M., & Rakoczy, H. (2003). What makes human cognition unique?
From individual to shared to collective intentionality. *Mind &
Language, 18*\ (2), 121–147.

Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty:
Heuristics and biases. *Science*, *185*\ (4157), 1124–1131.

van Troyer, G. (1994). Linguistic determinism and mutability: The
Sapir-Whorf “hypothesis” and intercultural communication. *JALT Journal,
2*, 163–178.

Wechsler, D. (1958). *The measurement of adult intelligence*. Baltimore:
Williams & Wilkins.

Wechsler, D. (1981). *Manual for the Wechsler Adult Intelligence
Scale—revised.* New York: Psychological Corporation.

Wechsler, D. (2002 ). *WPPSI-R manual.* New York: Psychological
Corporation.

Werker, J. F., & Lalonde, C. E. (1988). Cross-language speech
perception: Initial capabilities and developmental change.
*Developmental Psychology, 24*, 672–683.

Werker, J. F., & Tees, R. C. (1984). Cross-language speech perception:
Evidence for perceptual reorganization during the first year of life.
*Infant Behavior and Development, 7*, 49–63.

Whorf, B. L. (1956). *Language, thought and relativity*. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Williams, R. L., (1970). Danger: Testing and dehumanizing black
children. *Clinical Child Psychology Newsletter, 9*\ (1), 5–6.

Zwicker, J. G. (2005). Effectiveness of occupational therapy in
remediating handwriting difficulties in primary students: Cognitive
versus multisensory interventions. Unpublished master’s thesis,
University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada). Retrieved
from
http://dspace.library.uvic.ca:8080/bitstream/handle/1828/49/Zwicker%20thesis.pdf?sequence=1

.. |Three side by side images are shown. On the left is a person lying in the grass with a book, looking off into the distance. In the middle is a sculpture of a person sitting on rock, with chin rested on hand, and the elbow of that hand rested on knee. The third is a drawing of a person sitting cross-legged with his head resting on his hand, elbow on knee.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_07_00_Thinking.jpg
