============
Introduction
============



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

class=“introduction”

class=“summary” title=“Summary”

class=“review-questions” title=“Review Questions”

class=“critical-thinking” title=“Critical Thinking Questions”

class=“personal-application” title=“Personal Application Questions”

class=“references” title=“References”

|A picture shows two intertwined hands. One is the large hand of an
adult, and the other is the tiny hand of an infant. The infant’s entire
hand grasp is about the size of a single adult finger.|\ {:
#Figure_09_00_Hands}

Welcome to the story of your life. In this chapter we explore the
fascinating tale of how you have grown and developed into the person you
are today. We also look at some ideas about who you will grow into
tomorrow. Yours is a story of lifespan development
(`[link] <#Figure_09_00_Hands>`__), from the start of life to the end.

The process of human growth and development is more obvious in infancy
and childhood, yet your development is happening this moment and will
continue, minute by minute, for the rest of your life. Who you are today
and who you will be in the future depends on a blend of genetics,
environment, culture, relationships, and more, as you continue through
each phase of life. You have experienced firsthand much of what is
discussed in this chapter. Now consider what psychological science has
to say about your physical, cognitive, and psychosocial development,
from the womb to the tomb.

References
==========

Ainsworth, M. D. S., & Bell, S. M. (1970). Attachment, exploration, and
separation: Illustrated by the behavior of one-year-olds in a strange
situation. *Child Development, 41*, 49–67.

Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978).
*Patterns of attachment: A psychological study of the strange
situation*. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2007). The importance of play in
promoting healthy child development and maintaining strong parent-child
bonds. *Pediatrics, 199*\ (1), 182–191.

Amsterdam, B. (1972). Mirror image reactions before age two.
*Developmental Psychobiology, 5*, 297–305.

Archer, J. (1992). *Ethology and human development*. New York, NY:
Harvester Wheatsheaf.

Arnett, J. (2000). Emerging adulthood: A theory of development from the
late teens through the twenties. *American Psychologist, 55*\ (5),
469–480.

Ashley, S. J., Magnuson, S. I., Omnell, L. M., & Clarren, S. K. (1999).
Fetal alcohol syndrome: Changes in craniofacial form with age,
cognition, and timing of ethanol exposure in the macaque. *Teratology,
59*\ (3), 163–172.

Bahr, S. J., & Hoffman, J. P. (2010). Parenting style, religiosity,
peers, and adolescent heavy drinking. *Journal of Studies on Alcohol and
Drugs, 71*, 539–543.

Baillargeon, R. (2004). Infants’ reasoning about hidden objects:
Evidence for event-general and event-specific expectations.
*Developmental Science, 7*\ (4), 391–424.

Baillargeon, R. (1987). Young infants' reasoning about the physical and
spatial properties of a hidden object. *Cognitive
Development*, *2*\ (3), 179–200.

Baillargeon, R., Li, J., Gertner, Y., & Wu, D. (2011). How do infants
reason about physical events. *The Wiley-Blackwell handbook of childhood
cognitive development*, *2*, 11–48.

Barber, B. K. (1994). Cultural, family, and person contexts of
parent-adolescent conflict. *Journal of Marriage and the Family, 56*,
375–386.

Basseches, M. (1984). Dialectical thinking as metasystematic form of
cognitive organization. In M. L. Commons, F. A. Richards, & C. Armon
(Eds.), Beyond formal operations: Late adolescent and adult cognitive
development (pp. 216–238). New York, NY: Praeger.

Baumrind, D. (1971). Current patterns of parental authority.
*Developmental Psychology, 4*\ (1, Pt. 2), 1–103. doi:10.1037/h0030372

Baumrind, D. (1991). The influence of parenting style on adolescent
competence and substance use\ *. Journal of Early Adolescence, 11*\ (1),
56–95.

Bayley, N., & Oden, M. H. (1955). The maintenance of intellectual
ability in gifted adults. *Journal of Gerontology, 10*, 91–107.

Bjorklund, D. F. (1987). A note on neonatal imitation. *Developmental
Review, 7*, 86–92.

Blossom, M., & Morgan, J.L. (2006). Does the face say what the mouth
says? A study of infants’ sensitivity to visual prosody. In *30th anuual
Boston University conference on language development, Somerville, MA.*

Bogartz, R. S., Shinskey, J. L., & Schilling, T. (2000). *Infancy,
1*\ (4), 403–428.

Bowlby, J. (1969). *Attachment and loss: Attachment* (Vol. 1). New York,
NY: Basic Books.

Bowlby, J. (1988). *A secure base: Parent-child attachment and health
human development*. New York, NY: Basic Books.

Brumley, R., Enquidanos, S., Jamison, P., Seitz, R., Morgenstern, N.,
Saito, S., . . . Gonzalez, J. (2007). Increased satisfaction with care
and lower costs: Results of a randomized trial of in-home palliative
care. *Journal of the American Geriatric Society, 55*\ (7), 993–1000.

Brumley, R. D., Enquidanos, S., & Cherin, D. A. (2003). Effectiveness of
a home-based palliative care program for end-of-life. *Journal of
Palliative Medicine, 6*\ (5), 715–724.

Callaghan, T. C., Rochat, P., Lillard, A., Claux, M.L., Odden, H.,
Itakura, S., . . . Singh, S. (2005). Synchrony in the onset of
mental-state reasoning. *Psychological Science, 16*, 378–384.

Carel, J-C., Lahlou, N., Roger, M., & Chaussain, J. L. (2004).
Precocious puberty and statural growth. *Human Reproduction Update,
10*\ (2), 135–147.

Carstensen, L. L. (1992). Social and emotional patterns in adulthood:
Support for socioemotional selectivity. *Psychology and Aging, 7*\ (3),
331–338.

Case, R. (1985). *Intellectual development: Birth to Adulthood*. New
York, NY: Academic.

Casey, B. J., Tottenham, N., Liston, C., & Durston, S. (2005). Imaging
the developing brain: What have we learned about cognitive development?
*TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences, 19*\ (3), 104–110.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013). *Smoking during
pregnancy*. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/basic\_information/health\_effects/pregnancy/

Chick, K., Heilman-Houser, R., & Hunter, M. (2002). The impact of child
care on gender role development and gender stereotypes. *Early Childhood
Education Journal, 29*\ (3), 149–154.

Chomsky, N. (1957). *Syntactic structures*. The Hague, Netherlands:
Mouton.

Clements, R. (2004). An investigation of the status of outdoor play.
*Contemporary Issues in Early Childhood, 5*\ (1), 68–80.

Commons, M. L., & Bresette, L. M. (2006). Illuminating major creative
scientific innovators with postformal stages. In C. Hoare (Ed.),
*Handbook of adult development and learning* (pp. 255–280). New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.

Connor, S. R., Pyenson, B., Fitch, K., Spence, C., & Iwasaki, K. (2007).
Comparing hospice and nonhospice patient survival among patients who die
within a three-year window. *Journal of Pain and Symptom Management,
33*\ (3), 238–246.

Courage, M. L., & Howe, M. L. (2002). From infant to child: The dynamics
of cognitive change in the second year of life. *Psychological Bulletin,
128*, 250–277.

Curtiss, S. (1981). Dissociations between language and cognition: Cases
and implications. *Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
11*\ (1), 15–30.

Darling, N. (1999). *Parenting style and its correlates*. Retrieved from
ERIC database (EDO-PS-99-3)
http://ecap.crc.illinois.edu/eecearchive/digests/1999/darlin99.pdf

de Hevia, M. D., & Spelke, E. S. (2010). Number-space mapping in human
infants. *Psychological Science, 21*\ (5), 653–660.

Dennett, D. (1987). *The intentional stance*. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Diamond, A. (2009). The interplay of biology and the environment broadly
defined. *Developmental Psychology, 45*\ (1), 1–8.

Donenberg, G. R., Wilson, H. W., Emerson, E., Bryant, F. B. (2002).
Holding the line with a watchful eye: The impact of perceived parental
permissiveness and parental monitoring on risky sexual behavior among
adolescents in psychiatric care. *AIDS Education Prevention, 14*\ (2),
138–157.

Dornbusch, S. M., Ritter, P. L., Leiderman, P. H., Roberts, D. F., &
Fraleigh, M. J. (1987). The relation of parenting style to adolescent
school performance. *Child Development, 58*\ (5), 1244–1257.

Duncan, G. J., & Magnuson, K. A. (2005). Can family socioeconomic
resources account for racial and ethnic test score gaps? *The Future of
Children, 15*\ (1), 35–54.

Erikson, E. H. (1963). *Childhood and Society* (2nd ed.). New York, NY:
Norton.

Erikson, E. H. (1968). *Identity: Youth and crisis*. New York, NY:
Norton.

Ferrer, M., & Fugate, A. (2003). *Helping your school-age child develop
a healthy self-concept*. Retrieved from
http://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/fy570#FOOTNOTE\_2

Figdor, E., & Kaeser, L. (1998). Concerns mount over punitive approaches
to substance abuse among pregnant women. *The Guttmacher Report on
Public Policy 1*\ (5), 3–5.

Fischer, K. W., Yan, Z., & Stewart, J. (2003). Adult cognitive
development: Dynamics in the developmental web. In J. Valsiner & K
Connolly (Eds.), *Handbook of developmental psychology* (pp. 491–516).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Flannery, D. J., Rowe, D. C., & Gulley, B. L. (1993). Impact of pubertal
status, timing, and age on adolescent sexual experience and delinquency.
*Journal of Adolescent Research, 8*, 21–40.

Freud, S. (1909). Analysis of a phobia in a five-year-old boy. In
*Collected Papers: Volume 111, Case Histories (1949)* (pp. 149–289).
Hogarth Press: London.

Fromkin, V., Krashen, S., Curtiss, S., Rigler, D., & Rigler, M. (1974).
The development of language in Genie: A case of language acquisition
beyond the critical period. *Brain and Language, 1*, 81–107.

Galambos, N. L., & Almeida, D. M. (1992). Does parent-adolescent
conflict increase in early adolescence? *Journal of Marriage and the
Family, 54*, 737–747.

Ganger, J., & Brent, M.R. (2004). Reexamining the vocabulary spurt.
*Developmental Psychology, 40*\ (4), 621–632.

Ge, X., Conger, R. D., & Elder, G. H. (2001). Pubertal transition,
stressful life events, and the emergence of gender differences in
adolescent depressive symptoms. *Developmental Psychology, 37*, 404–417.

Gervai, J. (2009). Environmental and genetic influences on early
attachment. *Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health, 3*, 25.

Gesell, A. (1933). Maturation and the patterning of behavior. In C.
Murchison (Ed.), *A handbook of child psychology* (2nd ed.,
pp. 209–235). Worcester, MA: Clark University Press.

Gesell, A. (1939). *Biographies of child development*. New York, NY:
Paul B. Hoeber.

Gesell, A. (1940). *The first five years of life*. New York, NY: Harper.

Gesell, A., & Ilg, F. L. (1946). *The child from five to ten*. New York,
NY: Harper.

Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice: Psychological theory and
women's development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Gleitman, L.R., & Newport, E. L. (1995). The invention of language by
children: Environmental and biological influences on the acquisition of
language. In D.N. Osherson , L.R. Gleitman, & M. Liberman (Eds.), An
invitation to cognitive science: Language (pp. 1–24). Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.

Gleitman, L. R., & Newport, E. L. (1995). The invention of language by
children: Environmental and biological influences on the acquisition of
language. In L. R. Gleitman & M. Liberman (Eds.), *An invitation to
cognitive science, Vol. 1: Language*. (2nd ed.) (pp. 1–24). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Godkin, M., Krant, M., & Doster, N. (1984). The impact of hospice care
on families. *International Journal of Psychiatry in Medicine, 13*,
153–165.

Graber, J. A., Lewinsohn, P. M., Seeley, J. R., & Brooks-Gunn, J.
(1997). Is psychopathology associated with the timing of pubertal
development? *Journal of the Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
36*, 1768–1776.

Hair, E. C., Moore, K. A., Garrett, S. B., Kinukawa, A., Lippman, L., &
Michelson, E. (2005). The parent-adolescent relationship scale. In L.
Lippman (Ed.), *Conceptualizing and Measuring Indicators of Positive
Development: What Do Children Need to Fluorish?* (pp. 183–202). New
York, NY: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Press.

Hall, S. S. (2004, May). The good egg. *Discover*, 30–39.

Hall, G. S. (1904). *Adolescence*. New York, NY: Appleton.

Harlow, H. (1958). The nature of love. *American Psychologist, 13*,
673–685.

Harris, J. R. (2009). *The nurture assumption: Why children turn out the
way they do* (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Free Press.

Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (2003). The early catastrophe: The 30 million
word gap. *American Educator, 27*\ (1), 4–9.

Hatch, E. (1983). *Psycholinguistics: A second language perspective*.
Rowley, MA: Newbury House.

Hertzog, C., Kramer, A. F., Wilson, R. S., & Lindenberger, U. (2009).
Enrichment effects on adult cognitive development. *Psychological
Science in the Public Interest, 9*\ (1), 1–65.

Hood, R. W., Jr., Spilka, B., Hunsberger, B., & Corsuch, R. (1996). *The
psychology of religion: An empirical approach* (2nd ed.). New York, NY:
Guilford.

Huebler, F. (2005, December 14). International education statistics [Web
log post]. Retrieved from
http://huebler.blogspot.com/2005/12/age-and-level-of-education-in-nigeria.html

Hutchinson, N. (2011). A geographically informed vision of skills
development. *Geographical Education*, *24*, 15.

Huttenlocher, P. R., & Dabholkar, A. S. (1997). Regional differences in
synaptogenesis in human cerebral cortex. *Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 387*\ (2), 167–178.

Iverson, J.M., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2005). Gesture paves the way for
language development. *Psychological Science, 16*\ (5), 367–71.

Iyengar, S. S., Wells, R. E., & Schwartz, B. (2006). Doing better but
feeling worse: Looking for the best job undermines satisfaction.
*Psychological Science, 17*, 143–150.

Jos, P. H., Marshall, M. F., & Perlmutter, M. (1995). The Charleston
policy on cocaine use during pregnancy: A cautionary tale. *The Journal
of Law, Medicine & Ethics, 23*\ (2), 120–128.

Kaltiala-Heino, R. A., Rimpela, M., Rissanen, A., & Rantanen, P. (2001).
Early puberty and early sexual activity are associated with bulimic-type
eating pathology in middle adolescence. *Journal of Adolescent Health,
28*, 346–352.

Kaplan, H., & Dove, H. (1987). Infant development among the Aché of
Eastern Paraguay. *Developmental Psychology, 23*, 190–198.

Karasik, L. B., Adolph, K. E., Tamis-LeMonda, C. S., & Bornstein, M. H.
(2010). WEIRD Walking: Cross-cultural research on motor development.
*Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 33*\ (2-3), 95–96.

Karnik, S., & Kanekar, A. (2012). Childhood obesity: A global public
health crisis. *International Journal of Preventive Medicine, 3*\ (1),
1–7.

Kohlberg, L. (1969). Stage and sequence: The cognitive-developmental
approach to socialization. In D. A. Goslin (Ed.), *Handbook of
socialization theory and research* (p. 379). Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.

Kolb, B., & Whishaw, I. Q. (2009). *Fundamentals of human
neuropsychology*. New York, NY: Worth.

Kübler-Ross, E. (1969). *On death and dying*. New York, NY: Macmillan.

Labouvie-Vief, G., & Diehl, M. (1999). Self and personality development.
In J. C. Cavanaugh & S. K. Whitbourne (Eds.), *Gerontology: An
interdisciplinary perspective* (pp. 238–268). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.

Larson, E. B., Wang, L., Bowen, J. D., McCormick, W. C., Teri, L.,
Crane, P., & Kukull, W. (2006). Exercise is associated with reduced risk
for incident dementia among persons 65 years of age or older. *Annals of
Internal Medicine, 144*, 73–81.

Lee, V. E., & Burkam, D. T. (2002). *Inequality at the starting gate:
Social background differences in achievement as children begin school*.
Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.

Lobo, I. (2008) Environmental influences on gene expression. *Nature
Education 1*\ (1), 39.

Loop, E. (2013). *Major milestones in cognitive development in early
childhood*. Retrieved from
http://everydaylife.globalpost.com/major-milestones-cognitive-development-early-childhood-4625.html

Maccoby, E. (1980). *Social development: Psychological growth and the
parent-child relationship*. New York, NY: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

MacFarlane, A. (1978, February). What a baby knows. *Human Nature*,
74–81.

Maier, S. E., & West, J. R. (2001). Drinking patterns and
alcohol-related birth defects. *Alcohol Research & Health, 25*\ (3),
168–174.

Main, M., & Solomon, J. (1990). Procedures for identifying infants as
disorganized/disoriented during the Ainsworth Strange Situation. In M.
T. Greenberg, D. Cicchetti, & E. M. Cummings (Eds.), *Attachment in the
Preschool Years* (pp. 121–160). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.

Markus, H. R., Ryff, C. D., Curan, K., & Palmersheim, K. A. (2004). In
their own words: Well-being at midlife among high school-educated and
college-educated adults. In O. G. Brim, C. D. Ryff, & R. C. Kessler
(Eds.), *How healthy are we? A national study of well-being at midlife*
(pp. 273–319). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

McIntosh, D. N., Silver, R. C., & Wortman, C. B. (1993). Religion’s role
in adjustment to a negative life event: Coping with the loss of a child.
*Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65*, 812–821.

McMillan, S. C., Small, B. J., Weitzner, M., Schonwetter, R., Tittle,
M., Moody, L., & Haley, W. E. (2006). Impact of coping skills
intervention with family caregivers of hospice patients with
cancer. *Cancer*, *106*\ (1), 214-222.

Miklikowska, M., Duriez, B., & Soenens, B. (2011). Family roots of
empathy-related characteristics: The role of perceived maternal and
paternal need support in adolescence. *Developmental Psychology,
47*\ (5), 1342–1352.

Mills, M., & Melhuish, E. (1974). Recognition of mother’s voice in early
infancy. *Nature, 252*, 123–124.

Mohr, R. D., & Zoghi, C. (2006). Is job enrichment really enriching?
(U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Working Paper 389). Washington, DC:
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Retrieved from
http://www.bls.gov/ore/pdf/ec060010.pdf

Moore, K. A., Guzman, L., Hair, E. C., Lippman, L., & Garrett, S. B.
(2004). Parent-teen relationships and interactions: Far more positive
than not. *Child Trends Research Brief, 2004-25*. Washington, DC: Child
Trends.

National Institutes of Health. (2013). *What is prenatal care and why is
it important?* Retrieved from
http://www.nichd.nih.gov/health/topics/pregnancy/conditioninfo/Pages/prenatal-care.aspx

Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Larson, J. (1999). *Coping with loss*. Mahweh, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Overman, W. H., Bachevalier, J., Turner, M., & Peuster, A. (1992).
Object recognition versus object discrimination: Comparison between
human infants and infant monkeys. *Behavioral Neuroscience, 106*, 15–29.

Paloutzian, R. F. (1996). *Invitation to the psychology of religion*.
Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.

Parent, J., Forehand, R., Merchant, M. J., Edwards, M. C.,
Conners-Burrow, N. A., Long, N., & Jones, D. J. (2011). The relation of
harsh and permissive discipline with child disruptive behaviors: Does
child gender make a difference in an at-risk sample? *Journal of Family
Violence, 26*, 527–533.

Piaget, J. (1954). The construction of reality in the child. New York:
Basic Books.

Pickens, J. (1994). Full-term and preterm infants’ perception of
face-voice synchrony. Infant Behavior and Development, 17, 447–455.

Piaget, J. (1930). *The child’s conception of the world*. New York, NY:
Harcourt, Brace & World.

Piaget, J. (1932). *The moral judgment of the child*. New York, NY:
Harcourt, Brace & World.

Podewils, L. J., Guallar, E., Kuller, L. H., Fried, L. P., Lopez, O. L.,
Carlson, M., & Lyketsos, C. G. (2005). Physical activity, APOE genotype,
and dementia risk: Findings from the Cardiovascular Health Cognition
Study. *American Journal of Epidemiology, 161*, 639–651.

Pollack, W., & Shuster, T. (2000). *Real boys’ voices*. New York, NY:
Random House.

Rhodes, R. L., Mitchell, S. L., Miller, S. C., Connor, S. R., & Teno, J.
M. (2008). Bereaved family members' evaluation of hospice care: What
factors influence overall satisfaction with services? *Journal of Pain
and Symptom Management, 35*, 365–371.

Risley, T. R., & Hart, B. (2006). Promoting early language development.
In N. F. Watt, C. Ayoub, R. H. Bradley, J. E. Puma, & W. A. LeBoeuf
(Eds.), The crisis in youth mental health: Early intervention programs
and policies (Vol. 4, pp. 83–88). Westport, CT: Praeger.

Rothbaum, R., Weisz, J., Pott, M., Miyake, K., & Morelli, G. (2000).
Attachment and culture: Security in the United States and Japan.
*American Psychologist, 55*, 1093–1104.

Russell, S. T., Crockett, L. J., & Chao, R. (Eds.). (2010). Asian
American parenting and parent-adolescent relationships. In R. Levesque
(Series Ed.), *Advancing responsible adolescent development*. New York,
NY: Springer.

Ryff, C. D., & Singer, B. (2009). Understanding healthy aging: Key
components and their integration. In V. L. Bengtson, D. Gans., N. M.
Putney, & M. Silverstein. (Eds.), *Handbook of theories of aging* (2nd
ed., pp. 117–144). New York, NY: Springer.

Samarel, N. (1991). *Caring for life after death*. Washington, DC:
Hemisphere.

Sanson, A., & Rothbart, M. K. (1995). Child temperament and parenting.
In M. Bornstein (Ed.), Applied and practical parenting (Vol. 4,
pp. 299–321). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Schechter, C., & Byeb, B. (2007). Preliminary evidence for the impact of
mixed-income preschools on low-income children’s language growth. *Early
Childhood Research Quarterly, 22*, 137–146.

Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Tomer, R., & Aharon-Peretz, J. (2005). The
neuroanatomical basis of understanding sarcasm and its relationship to
social cognition. *Neuropsychology, 19*\ (3), 288–300.

Shanahan, L., McHale, S. M., Osgood, D. W., & Crouter, A. C. (2007).
Conflict frequency with mothers and fathers from middle childhood to
late adolescence: Within and between family comparisons. *Developmental
Psychology, 43*, 539–550.

Siegler, R. S. (2005). Children’s thinking (4th ed). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Siegler, R. S. (2006). Microgenetic analyses of learning. In D. Kuhn &
R. S. Siegler (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Cognition,
perception, and language (6th ed., Vol. 2). New York: Wiley.

Sinnott, J. D. (1998). *The development of logic in adulthood:
Postformal thought and its applications*. New York, NY: Springer.

Small, M. F. (1999). *Our babies, ourselves: How biology and culture
shape the way we parent*. New York, NY: Anchor Books.

Spelke, E.S., & Cortelyou, A. (1981). Perceptual aspects of social
knowing: Looking and listening in infancy. In M.E. Lamb & L.R. Sherrod
(Eds.), Infant social cognition: Empirical and theoretical
considerations (pp. 61–83). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Steinberg, L., & Morris, A. S. (2001). Adolescent development. *Annual
Review of Psychology, 52*, 83–110.

Sterns, H. L., & Huyck, M. H. (2001). The role of work in midlife. In M.
Lachman (Ed.), *The handbook of midlife development* (pp. 447–486). New
York, NY:Wiley.

Steven L. Youngentob, et. al. (2007). Experience-induced fetal
plasticity: The effect of gestational ethanol exposure on the behavioral
and neurophysiologic olfactory response to ethanol odor in early
postnatal and adult rats. *Behavioral Neuroscience, 121*\ (6),
1293–1305.

Stork, F. C., & Widdowson, D. A. (1974). *Learning about linguistics*.
London, UK: Hutchinson Ltd.

Streissguth, A. P., Bookstein, F. L., Barr, H. M., Sampson, P. D.,
O’Malley, K., & Young, J. K. (2004). Risk factors for adverse life
outcomes in fetal alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol effects.
*Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 25*\ (4), 228–238.

Striegel-Moore, R. H., & Cachelin, F. M. (1999). Body image concerns and
disordered eating in adolescent girls: Risk and protective factors. In
N. G. Johnson, M. C. Roberts, & J. Worell (Eds.), *Beyond appearance: A
new look at adolescent girls*. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association

Tanner, J. M. (1978). *Fetus into man: Physical growth from conception
to maturity*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Temel, J. S., Greer, J. A., Muzikansky, A., Gallagher, E. R., Admane,
S., Jackson, V. A. . . . Lynch, T. J. (2010). Early palliative care for
patients with metastic non-small-cell lung cancer. *New England Journal
of Medicine, 363*, 733–742.

Thomas, A. (1984). Temperament research: Where we are, where we are
going. *Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 30*\ (2), 103–109.

Tran, T. D., & Kelly, S. J. (2003). Critical periods for ethanol-induced
cell loss in the hippocampal formation. *Neurotoxicology and Teratology,
25*\ (5), 519–528.

Umberson, D., Pudrovska, T., & Reczek, C. (2010). Parenthood,
childlessness, and well-being: A life course perspective. *Journal of
Marriage and the Family, 72*\ (3), 612–629.

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. (2013,
June). *UIS Fact Sheet: Schooling for millions of children jeopardized
by reductions in aid*. Montreal, Canada: UNESCO Institute for
Statistics.

Vaillant, G. E. (2002). *Aging well*. New York, NY: Little Brown & Co.

Van der Graaff, J., Branje, S., De Wied, M., Hawk, S., Van Lier, P., &
Meeus, W. (2013). Perspective taking and empathetic concern in
adolescence: Gender differences in developmental changes. *Developmental
Psychology, 50*\ (3), 881.

van Ijzendoorn, M. H., & Sagi-Schwartz, A. (2008). Cross-cultural
patterns of attachment: Universal and contextual dimensions. In J.
Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), *Handbook of attachment*. New York, NY:
Guilford.

Vouloumanos, A., & Werker, J. F. (2004). Tuned to the signal: The
privileged status of speech for young infants. Developmental Science, 7,
270–276.

WHO Multicentre Growth Reference Study Group. (2006). *WHO Child growth
standards: Methods and development: Length/height-for-age,
weight-for-age, weight-for-length, weight-for-height and body mass
index-for-age*. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.

Winerman, L. (2011). Closing the achievement gap. *Monitor of
Psychology, 42*\ (8), 36.

Wortman, J. H., & Park, C. L. (2008). Religion and spirituality in
adjustment following bereavement: An integrative review. *Death Studies*

.. |A picture shows two intertwined hands. One is the large hand of an adult, and the other is the tiny hand of an infant. The infant’s entire hand grasp is about the size of a single adult finger.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_09_00_Hands.jpg
