============
Introduction
============



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

class=“introduction”

class=“summary” title=“Summary”

class=“review-questions” title=“Review Questions”

class=“critical-thinking” title=“Critical Thinking Questions”

class=“personal-application” title=“Personal Application Questions”

class=“references” title=“References”

|An illustration shows the outlines of two human heads facing toward one
another, with several photographs of people spread across the
background.|\ {:}

Clive Wearing is an accomplished musician who lost his ability to form
new memories when he became sick at the age of 46. While he can remember
how to play the piano perfectly, he cannot remember what he ate for
breakfast just an hour ago (Sacks, 2007). James Wannerton experiences a
taste sensation that is associated with the sound of words. His former
girlfriend’s name tastes like rhubarb (Mundasad, 2013). John Nash is a
brilliant mathematician and Nobel Prize winner. However, while he was a
professor at MIT, he would tell people that the *New York Times*
contained coded messages from extraterrestrial beings that were intended
for him. He also began to hear voices and became suspicious of the
people around him. Soon thereafter, Nash was diagnosed with
schizophrenia and admitted to a state-run mental institution (O’Connor &
Robertson, 2002). Nash was the subject of the 2001 movie *A Beautiful
Mind*. Why did these people have these experiences? How does the human
brain work? And what is the connection between the brain’s internal
processes and people’s external behaviors? This textbook will introduce
you to various ways that the field of psychology has explored these
questions.

References
==========

American Board of Forensic Psychology. (2014). *Brochure*. Retrieved
from http://www.abfp.com/brochure.asp

American Psychological Association. (2014). Retrieved from www.apa.org

American Psychological Association. (2014). Graduate training and career
possibilities in exercise and sport psychology. Retrieved from
http://www.apadivisions.org/division-47/about/resources/training.aspx?item=1

American Psychological Association. (2011). Psychology as a career.
Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/education/undergrad/psych-career.aspx

Ashliman, D. L. (2001). Cupid and Psyche. In Folktexts: A library of
folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Retrieved from
http://www.pitt.edu/~dash/cupid.html

Betancourt, H., & López, S. R. (1993). The study of culture, ethnicity,
and race in American psychology. *American Psychologist*, *48*, 629–637.

Black, S. R., Spence, S. A., & Omari, S. R. (2004). Contributions of
African Americans to the field of psychology. *Journal of Black
Studies*, *35*, 40–64.

Bulfinch, T. (1855). *The age of fable: Or, stories of gods and heroes*.
Boston, MA: Chase, Nichols and Hill.

Buss, D. M. (1989). Sex differences in human mate preferences:
Evolutionary hypotheses tested in 37 cultures. *Behavioral and Brain
Sciences*, *12*, 1–49.

Carlson, N. R. (2013). *Physiology of Behavior* (11th ed.). Boston, MA:
Pearson.

Confer, J. C., Easton, J. A., Fleischman, D. S., Goetz, C. D., Lewis, D.
M. G., Perilloux, C., & Buss, D. M. (2010). Evolutionary psychology.
Controversies, questions, prospects, and limitations. *American
Psychologist*, *65*, 100–126.

Crawford, M., & Marecek, J. (1989). Psychology reconstructs the female
1968–1988. *Psychology of Women Quarterly*, *13*, 147–165.

Danziger, K. (1980). The history of introspection reconsidered. *Journal
of the History of the Behavioral Sciences*, *16*, 241–262.

Darwin, C. (1871). *The* *descent of man and selection in relation to
sex*. London: John Murray.

Darwin, C. (1872). *The expression of the emotions in man and animals*.
London: John Murray.

DeAngelis, T. (2010). Fear not. *gradPSYCH Magazine*, 8, 38.

Department of Health and Human Services. (n.d.). Projected future growth
of the older population. Retrieved from
http://www.aoa.gov/Aging\_Statistics/future\_growth/future\_growth.aspx#age

Endler, J. A. (1986). *Natural Selection in the Wild*. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

Fogg, N. P., Harrington, P. E., Harrington, T. F., & Shatkin, L. (2012).
*College majors handbook with real career paths and payoffs* (3rd ed.).
St. Paul, MN: JIST Publishing.

Franko, D. L., et al. (2012). Racial/ethnic differences in adults in
randomized clinical trials of binge eating disorder. *Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology*, *80*, 186–195.

Friedman, H. (2008), Humanistic and positive psychology: The
methodological and epistemological divide. *The Humanistic
Psychologist*, *36*, 113–126.

Gordon, O. E. (1995). A brief history of psychology. Retrieved from
http://www.psych.utah.edu/gordon/Classes/Psy4905Docs/PsychHistory/index.html#maptop

Greek Myths & Greek Mythology. (2014). The myth of Psyche and Eros.
Retrieved from
http://www.greekmyths-greekmythology.com/psyche-and-eros-myth/

Green, C. D. (2001). Classics in the history of psychology. Retrieved
from http://psychclassics.yorku.ca/Krstic/marulic.htm

Greengrass, M. (2004). 100 years of B.F. Skinner. *Monitor on
Psychology*, *35*, 80.

Halonen, J. S. (2011). White paper: Are there too many psychology
majors? Prepared for the Staff of the State University System of Florida
Board of Governors. Retrieved from
http://www.cogdop.org/page\_attachments/0000/0200/FLA\_White\_Paper\_for\_cogop\_posting.pdf

Hock, R. R. (2009). Social psychology. *Forty studies that changed
psychology: Explorations into the history of psychological research*
(pp. 308–317). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.

Hoffman, C. (2012). *Careers in clinical, counseling, or school
psychology; mental health counseling; clinical social work; marriage &
family therapy and related professions*. Retrieved from
http://www.indiana.edu/~psyugrad/advising/docs/Careers%20in%20Mental%20Health%20Counseling.pdf

Jang, K. L., Livesly, W. J., & Vernon, P. A. (1996). Heritability of the
Big Five personality dimensions and their facets: A twin study. *Journal
of Personality*, 64, 577–591.

Johnson, R., & Lubin, G. (2011). College exposed: What majors are most
popular, highest paying and most likely to get you a job. *Business
Insider.com.* Retrieved from
http://www.businessinsider.com/best-college-majors-highest-income-most-employed-georgetwon-study-2011-6?op=1

Knekt, P. P., et al. (2008). Randomized trial on the effectiveness of
long- and short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy and solution-focused
therapy on psychiatric symptoms during a 3-year
follow-up. *Psychological Medicine: A Journal of Research In Psychiatry
And The Allied Sciences*, *38*, 689–703.

Landers, R. N. (2011, June 14). Grad school: Should I get a PhD or
Master’s in I/O psychology? [Web log post]. Retrieved from
http://neoacademic.com/2011/06/14/grad-school-should-i-get-a-ph-d-or-masters-in-io-psychology/#.UuKKLftOnGg

Macdonald, C. (2013). *Health psychology center presents: What is health
psychology?* Retrieved from
http://healthpsychology.org/what-is-health-psychology/

McCrae, R. R. & Costa, P. T. (2008). Empirical and theoretical status of
the five-factor model of personality traits. In G. J. Boyle, G.
Matthews, & D. H. Saklofske (Eds.), *The Sage handbook of personality
theory and assessment. Vol. 1 Personality theories and models*. London:
Sage.

Michalski, D., Kohout, J., Wicherski, M., & Hart, B. (2011). *2009
Doctorate Employment Survey*. APA Center for Workforce Studies.
Retrieved from
http://www.apa.org/workforce/publications/09-doc-empl/index.aspx

Miller, G. A. (2003). The cognitive revolution: A historical
perspective. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences*, 7, 141–144.

Munakata, Y., McClelland, J. L., Johnson, M. H., & Siegler, R. S.
(1997). Rethinking infant knowledge: Toward an adaptive process account
of successes and failures in object permanence tasks. *Psychological
Review*, 104, 689–713.

Mundasad, S. (2013). *Word-taste synaesthesia: Tasting names, places,
and Anne Boleyn*. Retrieved from
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-21060207

Munsey, C. (2009). More states forgo a postdoc requirement. *Monitor on
Psychology*, 40, 10.

National Association of School Psychologists. (n.d.). Becoming a
nationally certified school psychologist (NCSP). Retrieved from
http://www.nasponline.org/CERTIFICATION/becomeNCSP.aspx

Nicolas, S., & Ferrand, L. (1999). Wundt’s laboratory at Leipzig in
1891. *History of Psychology*, *2*, 194–203.

Norcross, J. C. (n.d.) Clinical versus counseling psychology: What’s the
diff? Available at
http://www.csun.edu/~hcpsy002/Clinical%20Versus%20Counseling%20Psychology.pdf

Norcross, J. C., & Castle, P. H. (2002). Appreciating the PsyD: The
facts. *Eye on Psi Chi*, 7, 22–26.

O’Connor, J. J., & Robertson, E. F. (2002). John Forbes Nash. Retrieved
from http://www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/~history/Biographies/Nash.html

O’Hara, M. (n.d.). Historic review of humanistic psychology. Retrieved
from
http://www.ahpweb.org/index.php?option=com\_k2&view=item&layout=item&id=14&Itemid=24

Person, E. S. (1980). Sexuality as the mainstay of identity:
Psychoanalytic perspectives. *Signs*, 5, 605–630.

Rantanen, J., Metsäpelto, R. L., Feldt, T., Pulkkinen, L., & Kokko, K.
(2007). Long-term stability in the Big Five personality traits in
adulthood. *Scandinavian Journal of Psychology*, 48, 511–518.

Riggio, R. E. (2013). What is industrial/organizational psychology?
Psychology Today. Retrieved from
http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/cutting-edge-leadership/201303/what-is-industrialorganizational-psychology

Sacks, O. (2007). A neurologists notebook: The abyss, music and amnesia.
The New Yorker. Retrieved from
http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2007/09/24/070924fa\_fact\_sacks?currentPage=all

Shedler, J. (2010). The efficacy of psychodynamic
psychotherapy. *American Psychologist*, *65*\ (2), 98–109.

Soldz, S., & Vaillant, G. E. (1999). The Big Five personality traits and
the life course: A 45-year longitudinal study. *Journal of Research in
Personality*, 33, 208–232.

Thorne, B. M., & Henley, T. B. (2005). Connections in the history and
systems of psychology (3rd ed.). Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company.

Tolman, E. C. (1938). The determiners of behavior at a choice point.
*Psychological Review*, *45*, 1–41.

U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.
(2013). *Digest of Education Statistics, 2012* (NCES 2014-015).

Weisstein, N. (1993). Psychology constructs the female: Or, the fantasy
life of the male psychologist (with some attention to the fantasies of
his friends, the male biologist and the male anthropologist). *Feminism
and Psychology*, *3*, 195–210.

Westen, D. (1998). The scientific legacy of Sigmund Freud, toward a
psychodynamically informed psychological science. *Psychological
Bulletin*, *124*, 333–371.

.. |An illustration shows the outlines of two human heads facing toward one another, with several photographs of people spread across the background.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_01_00_Collage.jpg
