=====================
Careers in Psychology
=====================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Understand
   educational requirements for careers in academic settings \*
   Understand the demands of a career in an academic setting \*
   Understand career options outside of academic settings

Psychologists can work in many different places doing many different
things. In general, anyone wishing to continue a career in psychology at
a 4-year institution of higher education will have to earn a doctoral
degree in psychology for some specialties and at least a master’s degree
for others. In most areas of psychology, this means earning a PhD in a
relevant area of psychology. Literally, **PhD**\ {: data-type=“term”}
refers to a doctor of philosophy degree, but here, philosophy does not
refer to the field of philosophy per se. Rather, philosophy in this
context refers to many different disciplinary perspectives that would be
housed in a traditional college of liberal arts and sciences.

The requirements to earn a PhD vary from country to country and even
from school to school, but usually, individuals earning this degree must
complete a dissertation. A **dissertation**\ {: data-type=“term”} is
essentially a long research paper or bundled published articles
describing research that was conducted as a part of the candidate’s
doctoral training. In the United States, a dissertation generally has to
be defended before a committee of expert reviewers before the degree is
conferred (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_01_04_Hooding>`__).

|A photograph shows several people are gathered outdoors wearing caps
and gowns in a graduation ceremony.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_01_04_Hooding}

Once someone earns her PhD, she may seek a faculty appointment at a
college or university. Being on the faculty of a college or university
often involves dividing time between teaching, research, and service to
the institution and profession. The amount of time spent on each of
these primary responsibilities varies dramatically from school to
school, and it is not uncommon for faculty to move from place to place
in search of the best personal fit among various academic environments.
The previous section detailed some of the major areas that are commonly
represented in psychology departments around the country; thus,
depending on the training received, an individual could be anything from
a biological psychologist to a clinical psychologist in an academic
setting (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_01_04_Employed>`__).

|A pie chart is labeled “Percent of 2009 Psychology Doctorates Employed
in Different Sectors.” The percentage breakdown is University: 26%,
Hospital or health service: 25%, Government/VA medical center: 16%,
Business or nonprofit: 10%, Other educational institutions: 8%, and
Medical school: 6%, Independent practice: 6%. Beneath the pie chart, the
label reads: “Source: Michalski, Kohout, Wicherski, & Hart, 2011.”|\ {:
#CNX_Psych_01_04_Employed}

OTHER CAREERS IN ACADEMIC SETTINGS
==================================

Often times, schools offer more courses in psychology than their
full-time faculty can teach. In these cases, it is not uncommon to bring
in an adjunct faculty member or instructor. Adjunct faculty members and
instructors usually have an advanced degree in psychology, but they
often have primary careers outside of academia and serve in this role as
a secondary job. Alternatively, they may not hold the doctoral degree
required by most 4-year institutions and use these opportunities to gain
experience in teaching. Furthermore, many 2-year colleges and schools
need faculty to teach their courses in psychology. In general, many of
the people who pursue careers at these institutions have master’s
degrees in psychology, although some PhDs make careers at these
institutions as well.

Some people earning PhDs may enjoy research in an academic setting.
However, they may not be interested in teaching. These individuals might
take on faculty positions that are exclusively devoted to conducting
research. This type of position would be more likely an option at large,
research-focused universities.

In some areas in psychology, it is common for individuals who have
recently earned their PhD to seek out positions in **postdoctoral
training programs**\ {: data-type=“term”} that are available before
going on to serve as faculty. In most cases, young scientists will
complete one or two postdoctoral programs before applying for a
full-time faculty position. Postdoctoral training programs allow young
scientists to further develop their research programs and broaden their
research skills under the supervision of other professionals in the
field.

CAREER OPTIONS OUTSIDE OF ACADEMIC SETTINGS
===========================================

Individuals who wish to become practicing clinical psychologists have
another option for earning a doctoral degree, which is known as a PsyD.
A **PsyD**\ {: data-type=“term”} is a doctor of psychology degree that
is increasingly popular among individuals interested in pursuing careers
in clinical psychology. PsyD programs generally place less emphasis on
research-oriented skills and focus more on application of psychological
principles in the clinical context (Norcorss & Castle, 2002).

Regardless of whether earning a PhD or PsyD, in most states, an
individual wishing to practice as a licensed clinical or counseling
psychologist may complete postdoctoral work under the supervision of a
licensed psychologist. Within the last few years, however, several
states have begun to remove this requirement, which would allow someone
to get an earlier start in his career (Munsey, 2009). After an
individual has met the state requirements, his credentials are evaluated
to determine whether he can sit for the licensure exam. Only individuals
that pass this exam can call themselves licensed clinical or counseling
psychologists (Norcross, n.d.). Licensed clinical or counseling
psychologists can then work in a number of settings, ranging from
private clinical practice to hospital settings. It should be noted that
clinical psychologists and psychiatrists do different things and receive
different types of education. While both can conduct therapy and
counseling, clinical psychologists have a PhD or a PsyD, whereas
psychiatrists have a doctor of medicine degree (MD). As such, licensed
clinical psychologists can administer and interpret psychological tests,
while psychiatrists can prescribe medications.

Individuals earning a PhD can work in a variety of settings, depending
on their areas of specialization. For example, someone trained as a
biopsychologist might work in a pharmaceutical company to help test the
efficacy of a new drug. Someone with a clinical background might become
a forensic psychologist and work within the legal system to make
recommendations during criminal trials and parole hearings, or serve as
an expert in a court case.

While earning a doctoral degree in psychology is a lengthy process,
usually taking between 5–6 years of graduate study (DeAngelis, 2010),
there are a number of careers that can be attained with a master’s
degree in psychology. People who wish to provide psychotherapy can
become licensed to serve as various types of professional counselors
(Hoffman, 2012). Relevant master’s degrees are also sufficient for
individuals seeking careers as school psychologists (National
Association of School Psychologists, n.d.), in some capacities related
to sport psychology (American Psychological Association, 2014), or as
consultants in various industrial settings (Landers, 2011, June 14).
Undergraduate coursework in psychology may be applicable to other
careers such as psychiatric social work or psychiatric nursing, where
assessments and therapy may be a part of the job.

As mentioned in the opening section of this chapter, an undergraduate
education in psychology is associated with a knowledge base and skill
set that many employers find quite attractive. It should come as no
surprise, then, that individuals earning bachelor’s degrees in
psychology find themselves in a number of different careers, as shown in
`[link] <#Table_01_04_01>`__. Examples of a few such careers can involve
serving as case managers, working in sales, working in human resource
departments, and teaching in high schools. The rapidly growing realm of
healthcare professions is another field in which an education in
psychology is helpful and sometimes required. For example, the Medical
College Admission Test (MCAT) exam that people must take to be admitted
to medical school now includes a section on the psychological
foundations of behavior.

.. raw:: html

   <table id="Table_01_04_01" summary="A table shows the top occupations employing graduates with a BA in Psychology. The columns in the first row are labeled Ranking, and Occupation. Beginning in row two, 1 is Mid- and top-level management (executive, administrator), 2 is Sales, 3 is Social work, 4 is Other management positions, 5 is Human resources (personnel, training), 6 is Other administrative positions, 7 is Insurance, real estate, business, 8 is Marketing and sales, 9 is Healthcare (nurse, pharmacist, therapist), and 10 is Finance (accountant, auditor).">

.. raw:: html

   <caption>

Top Occupations Employing Graduates with a BA in Psychology (Fogg,
Harrington, Harrington, & Shatkin, 2012)

.. raw:: html

   </caption>

.. raw:: html

   <thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Ranking

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Occupation

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tbody>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Mid- and top-level management (executive, administrator)

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

2

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Sales

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

3

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Social work

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

4

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Other management positions

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

5

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Human resources (personnel, training)

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

6

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Other administrative positions

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

7

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Insurance, real estate, business

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

8

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Marketing and sales

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

9

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Healthcare (nurse, pharmacist, therapist)

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

10

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Finance (accountant, auditor)

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </tbody>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Watch a `brief video <http://cas2.umkc.edu/psychology/career.asp>`__
   describing some of the career options available to people earning
   bachelor’s degrees in psychology.

Summary
=======

Generally, academic careers in psychology require doctoral degrees.
However, there are a number of nonacademic career options for people who
have master’s degrees in psychology. While people with bachelor’s
degrees in psychology have more limited psychology-related career
options, the skills acquired as a function of an undergraduate education
in psychology are useful in a variety of work contexts.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      If someone wanted to become a psychology professor at a 4-year
      college, then s/he would probably need a \_______\_ degree in
      psychology.

      1. bachelor of science
      2. bachelor of art
      3. master’s
      4. PhD {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      The \_______\_ places less emphasis on research and more emphasis
      on application of therapeutic skills.

      1. PhD
      2. PsyD
      3. postdoctoral training program
      4. dissertation {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which of the following degrees would be the minimum required to
      teach psychology courses in high school?

      1. PhD
      2. PsyD
      3. master’s degree
      4. bachelor’s degree {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      One would need at least a(n) \_______\_ degree to serve as a
      school psychologist.

      1. associate’s
      2. bachelor’s
      3. master’s
      4. doctoral {: type=“a”}

   .. container::
      :name: eip-idp48694832

      C

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Why is an undergraduate education in psychology so helpful in a
      number of different lines of work?

   .. container::

      An undergraduate education in psychology hones critical thinking
      skills. These skills are useful in many different work settings.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Other than a potentially greater salary, what would be the reasons
      an individual would continue on to get a graduate degree in
      psychology?

   .. container::

      The graduate degree would be a stronger guarantee of working in a
      psychology-related field and one would have greater control over
      the specialty of that work. It would allow one to practice in a
      clinical setting. In general, it would allow someone to work in a
      more independent or supervisory capacity.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which of the career options described in this section is most
      appealing to you?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   dissertation
      long research paper about research that was conducted as a part of
      the candidate’s doctoral training ^
   PhD
      (doctor of philosophy) doctoral degree conferred in many
      disciplinary perspectives housed in a traditional college of
      liberal arts and sciences ^
   postdoctoral training program
      allows young scientists to further develop their research programs
      and broaden their research skills under the supervision of other
      professionals in the field ^
   PsyD
      (doctor of psychology) doctoral degree that places less emphasis
      on research-oriented skills and focuses more on application of
      psychological principles in the clinical context

.. |A photograph shows several people are gathered outdoors wearing caps and gowns in a graduation ceremony.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_01_04_Hooding.jpg
.. |A pie chart is labeled “Percent of 2009 Psychology Doctorates Employed in Different Sectors.” The percentage breakdown is University: 26%, Hospital or health service: 25%, Government/VA medical center: 16%, Business or nonprofit: 10%, Other educational institutions: 8%, and Medical school: 6%, Independent practice: 6%. Beneath the pie chart, the label reads: “Source: Michalski, Kohout, Wicherski, & Hart, 2011.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_01_04_Employed.jpg
