============
Introduction
============



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

class=“introduction”

class=“summary” title=“Summary”

class=“review-questions” title=“Review Questions”

class=“critical-thinking” title=“Critical Thinking Questions”

class=“personal-application” title=“Personal Application Questions”

class=“references” title=“References”

|A photograph shows a baby turtle moving across sand toward the ocean. A
photograph shows a young child standing on a surfboard in a small
wave.|\ {:}

The summer sun shines brightly on a deserted stretch of beach. Suddenly,
a tiny grey head emerges from the sand, then another and another. Soon
the beach is teeming with loggerhead sea turtle hatchlings
(`[link] <#fs-idp78123968>`__). Although only minutes old, the
hatchlings know exactly what to do. Their flippers are not very
efficient for moving across the hot sand, yet they continue onward,
instinctively. Some are quickly snapped up by gulls circling overhead
and others become lunch for hungry ghost crabs that dart out of their
holes. Despite these dangers, the hatchlings are driven to leave the
safety of their nest and find the ocean.

Not far down this same beach, Ben and his son, Julian, paddle out into
the ocean on surfboards. A wave approaches. Julian crouches on his
board, then jumps up and rides the wave for a few seconds before losing
his balance. He emerges from the water in time to watch his father ride
the face of the wave.

Unlike baby sea turtles, which know how to find the ocean and swim with
no help from their parents, we are not born knowing how to swim (or
surf). Yet we humans pride ourselves on our ability to learn. In fact,
over thousands of years and across cultures, we have created
institutions devoted entirely to learning. But have you ever asked
yourself how exactly it is that we learn? What processes are at work as
we come to know what we know? This chapter focuses on the primary ways
in which learning occurs.

References
==========

Anderson, C. A., & Gentile, D. A. (2008). Media violence, aggression,
and public policy. In E. Borgida & S. Fiske (Eds.), Beyond common sense:
Psychological science in the courtroom (p. 322). Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Bandura, A., Ross, D., & Ross, S. A. (1961). Transmission of aggression
through imitation of aggressive models. *Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 63*, 575–582.

Cangi, K., & Daly, M. (2013). The effects of token economies on the
occurrence of appropriate and inappropriate behaviors by children with
autism in a social skills setting. *West Chester University: Journal of
Undergraduate Research*. Retrieved from
http://www.wcupa.edu/UndergraduateResearch/journal/documents/cangi\_S2012.pdf

Carlson, L., Holscher, C., Shipley, T., & Conroy Dalton, R. (2010).
Getting lost in buildings. *Current Directions in Psychological Science,
19*\ (5), 284–289.

Cialdini, R. B. (2008). *Influence: Science and practice* (5th ed.).
Boston, MA: Pearson Education.

Chance, P. (2009). *Learning and behavior* (6th ed.). Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth, Cengage Learning.

DeAngelis, T. (2010). ‘Little Albert’ regains his identity. *Monitor on
Psychology, 41*\ (1), 10.

Franzen, H. (2001, May 24). Gambling, like food and drugs, produces
feelings of reward in the brain. Scientific American [online]. Retrieved
from
http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=gamblinglike-food-and-dru

Fryer, R. G., Jr. (2010, April). Financial incentives and student
achievement: Evidence from randomized trials. *National Bureau of
Economic Research [NBER] Working Paper, No. 15898*. Retrieved from
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15898

Garcia, J., & Koelling, R. A. (1966). Relation of cue to consequence in
avoidance learning. *Psychonomic Science, 4*, 123–124.

Garcia, J., & Rusiniak, K. W. (1980). What the nose learns from the
mouth. In D. Müller-Schwarze & R. M. Silverstein (Eds.), *Chemical
signals: Vertebrates and aquatic invertebrates* (pp. 141–156). New York,
NY: Plenum Press.

Gershoff, E. T. (2002). Corporal punishment by parents and associated
child behaviors and experiences: A meta-analytic and theoretical review.
*Psychological Bulletin, 128*\ (4), 539–579.
doi:10.1037//0033-2909.128.4.539

Gershoff, E.T., Grogan-Kaylor, A., Lansford, J. E., Chang, L., Zelli,
A., Deater-Deckard, K., & Dodge, K. A. (2010). Parent discipline
practices in an international sample: Associations with child behaviors
and moderation by perceived normativeness. *Child Development, 81*\ (2),
487–502.

Hickock, G. (2010). The role of mirror neurons in speech and language
processing. *Brain and Language, 112*, 1–2.

Holmes, S. (1993). Food avoidance in patients undergoing cancer
chemotherapy. *Support Care Cancer, 1*\ (6), 326–330.

Hunt, M. (2007). *The story of psychology*. New York, NY: Doubleday.

Huston, A. C., Donnerstein, E., Fairchild, H., Feshbach, N. D., Katz, P.
A., Murray, J. P., . . . Zuckerman, D. (1992). *Big world, small screen:
The role of television in American society*. Lincoln, NE: University of
Nebraska Press.

Hutton, J. L., Baracos, V. E., & Wismer, W. V. (2007). Chemosensory
dysfunction is a primary factor in the evolution of declining
nutritional status and quality of life with patients with advanced
cancer. *Journal of Pain Symptom Management, 33*\ (2), 156–165.

Illinois Institute for Addiction Recovery. (n.d.). *WTVP on gambling*.
Retrieved from http://www.addictionrecov.org/InTheNews/Gambling/

Jacobsen, P. B., Bovbjerg, D. H., Schwartz, M. D., Andrykowski, M. A.,
Futterman, A. D., Gilewski, T., . . . Redd, W. H. (1993). Formation of
food aversions in cancer patients receiving repeated infusions of
chemotherapy. *Behaviour Research and Therapy, 31*\ (8), 739–748.

Kirsch, SJ (2010). Media and youth: A developmental perspective. Malden
MA: Wiley Blackwell.

Lefrançois, G. R. (2012). *Theories of human learning: What the
professors said* (6th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, Cengage Learning.

Miller, L. E., Grabell, A., Thomas, A., Bermann, E., & Graham-Bermann,
S. A. (2012). The associations between community violence, television
violence, intimate partner violence, parent-child aggression, and
aggression in sibling relationships of a sample of preschoolers.
*Psychology of Violence, 2(2),* 165–78. doi:10.1037/a0027254

Murrell, A., Christoff, K. & Henning, K. (2007) Characteristics of
domestic violence offenders: associations with childhood exposure to
violence. *Journal of Family Violence, 22*\ (7), 523-532.

Pavlov, I. P. (1927). *Conditioned reflexes: An investigation of the
physiological activity of the cerebral cortex* (G. V. Anrep, Ed. &
Trans.). London, UK: Oxford University Press.

Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2002). From
mirror neurons to imitation: Facts and speculations. In A. N. Meltzoff &
W. Prinz (Eds.), *The imitative mind: Development, evolution, and brain
bases* (pp. 247–66). Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University
Press.

Rizzolatti, G., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2006, November). Mirrors in
the mind. *Scientific American* [online], pp. 54–61.

Roy, A., Adinoff, B., Roehrich, L., Lamparski, D., Custer, R., Lorenz,
V., . . . Linnoila, M. (1988). Pathological gambling: A psychobiological
study. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 45*\ (4), 369–373.
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1988.01800280085011

Skinner, B. F. (1938). *The behavior of organisms: An experimental
analysis*. New York, NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Skinner, B. F. (1953). *Science and human behavior*. New York, NY:
Macmillan.

Skinner, B. F. (1961). *Cumulative record: A selection of papers*. New
York, NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Skinner’s utopia: Panacea, or path to hell? (1971, September 20). *Time*
[online]. Retrieved from
http://www.wou.edu/~girodm/611/Skinner%27s\_utopia.pdf

Skolin, I., Wahlin, Y. B., Broman, D. A., Hursti, U-K. K., Larsson, M.
V., & Hernell, O. (2006). Altered food intake and taste perception in
children with cancer after start of chemotherapy: Perspectives of
children, parents and nurses. *Supportive Care in Cancer, 14*, 369–78.

Thorndike, E. L. (1911). Animal intelligence: An experimental study of
the associative processes in animals. *Psychological Monographs, 8*.

Tolman, E. C., & Honzik, C. H. (1930). Degrees of hunger, reward, and
non-reward, and maze performance in rats. *University of California
Publications in Psychology, 4*, 241–256.

Tolman, E. C., Ritchie, B. F., & Kalish, D. (1946). Studies in spatial
learning: II. Place learning versus response learning. *Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 36*, 221–229. doi:10.1037/h0060262

Watson, J. B. & Rayner, R. (1920). Conditioned emotional reactions.
*Journal of Experimental Psychology, 3*, 1–14.

Watson, J. B. (1919). *Psychology from the standpoint of a behaviorist*.
Philadelphia, PA: J. B. Lippincott.

Yamamoto, S., Humle, T., & Tanaka, M. (2013). Basis for cumulative
cultural evolution in chimpanzees: Social learning of a more efficient
tool-use technique. *PLoS ONE, 8*\ (1): e55768.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0055768

.. |A photograph shows a baby turtle moving across sand toward the ocean. A photograph shows a young child standing on a surfboard in a small wave.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_06_00_Turtles.jpg
