=====================
Humanistic Approaches
=====================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Discuss the
   contributions of Abraham Maslow and Carl Rogers to personality
   development

As the “third force” in psychology, **humanism**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis} is touted as a reaction both to the pessimistic
determinism of psychoanalysis, with its emphasis on psychological
disturbance, and to the behaviorists’ view of humans passively reacting
to the environment, which has been criticized as making people out to be
personality-less robots. It does not suggest that psychoanalytic,
behaviorist, and other points of view are incorrect but argues that
these perspectives do not recognize the depth and meaning of human
experience, and fail to recognize the innate capacity for self-directed
change and transforming personal experiences. This perspective focuses
on how healthy people develop. One pioneering humanist, Abraham
**Maslow**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}, studied people who he
considered to be healthy, creative, and productive, including Albert
Einstein, Eleanor Roosevelt, Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, and
others. Maslow (1950, 1970) found that such people share similar
characteristics, such as being open, creative, loving, spontaneous,
compassionate, concerned for others, and accepting of themselves. When
you studied motivation, you learned about one of the best-known
humanistic theories, Maslow's hierarchy of needs theory, in which Maslow
proposes that human beings have certain needs in common and that these
needs must be met in a certain order. The highest need is the need for
self-actualization, which is the achievement of our fullest potential.

Another humanistic theorist was Carl Rogers. One of Rogers’s main ideas
about personality regards **self-concept**\ {: data-type=“term”}, our
thoughts and feelings about ourselves. How would you respond to the
question, “Who am I?” Your answer can show how you see yourself. If your
response is primarily positive, then you tend to feel good about who you
are, and you see the world as a safe and positive place. If your
response is mainly negative, then you may feel unhappy with who you are.
Rogers further divided the self into two categories: the ideal self and
the real self. The **ideal self**\ {: data-type=“term”} is the person
that you would like to be; the **real self**\ {: data-type=“term”} is
the person you actually are. Rogers focused on the idea that we need to
achieve consistency between these two selves. We experience
**congruence**\ {: data-type=“term”} when our thoughts about our real
self and ideal self are very similar—in other words, when our
self-concept is accurate. High congruence leads to a greater sense of
self-worth and a healthy, productive life. Parents can help their
children achieve this by giving them unconditional positive regard, or
unconditional love. According to Rogers (1980), “As persons are accepted
and prized, they tend to develop a more caring attitude towards
themselves” (p. 116). Conversely, when there is a great discrepancy
between our ideal and actual selves, we experience a state Rogers called
**incongruence**\ {: data-type=“term”}, which can lead to maladjustment.
Both Rogers’s and Maslow’s theories focus on individual choices and do
not believe that biology is deterministic.

Summary
=======

Humanistic psychologists Abraham Maslow and Carl Rogers focused on the
growth potential of healthy individuals. They believed that people
strive to become self-actualized. Both Rogers’s and Maslow’s theories
greatly contributed to our understanding of the self. They emphasized
free will and self-determination, with each individual desiring to
become the best person they can become.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Self-concept refers to \________.

      1. our level of confidence in our own abilities
      2. all of our thoughts and feelings about ourselves
      3. the belief that we control our own outcomes
      4. the belief that our outcomes are outside of our control {:
         type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      The idea that people’s ideas about themselves should match their
      actions is called \________.

      1. confluence
      2. conscious
      3. conscientiousness
      4. congruence {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

Personal Application Questions
==============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Respond to the question, “Who am I?” Based on your response, do
      you have a negative or a positive self-concept? What are some
      experiences that led you to develop this particular self-concept?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   congruence
      state of being in which our thoughts about our real and ideal
      selves are very similar ^
   ideal self
      person we would like to be ^
   incongruence
      state of being in which there is a great discrepancy between our
      real and ideal selves ^
   real self
      person who we actually are ^
   self-concept
      our thoughts and feelings about ourselves
