============
Introduction
============



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

class=“introduction”

class=“summary” title=“Summary”

class=“review-questions” title=“Review Questions”

class=“critical-thinking” title=“Critical Thinking Questions”

class=“personal-application” title=“Personal Application Questions”

class=“references” title=“References”

|A photograph shows a person playing a piano on the sidewalk near a busy
intersection in a city.|\ {:}

Imagine standing on a city street corner. You might be struck by
movement everywhere as cars and people go about their business, by the
sound of a street musician’s melody or a horn honking in the distance,
by the smell of exhaust fumes or of food being sold by a nearby vendor,
and by the sensation of hard pavement under your feet.

We rely on our sensory systems to provide important information about
our surroundings. We use this information to successfully navigate and
interact with our environment so that we can find nourishment, seek
shelter, maintain social relationships, and avoid potentially dangerous
situations.

This chapter will provide an overview of how sensory information is
received and processed by the nervous system and how that affects our
conscious experience of the world. We begin by learning the distinction
between sensation and perception. Then we consider the physical
properties of light and sound stimuli, along with an overview of the
basic structure and function of the major sensory systems. The chapter
will close with a discussion of a historically important theory of
perception called Gestalt.

References
==========

Aaron, J. I., Mela, D. J., & Evans, R. E. (1994). The influences of
attitudes, beliefs, and label information on perceptions of reduced-fat
spread. Appetite, 22, 25–37.

Abraira, V. E., & Ginty, D. D. (2013). The sensory neurons of touch.
*Neuron, 79*, 618–639.

Ayabe-Kanamura, S., Saito, S., Distel, H., Martínez-Gómez, M., & Hudson,
R. (1998). Differences and similarities in the perception of everyday
odors: A Japanese-German cross-cultural study. *Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 855*, 694–700.

Chen, Q., Deng, H., Brauth, S. E., Ding, L., & Tang, Y. (2012). Reduced
performance of prey targeting in pit vipers with contralaterally
occluded infrared and visual senses. *PloS ONE, 7*\ (5), e34989.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0034989

Comfort, A. (1971). Likelihood of human pheromones. *Nature, 230*,
432–479.

Correll, J., Park, B., Judd, C. M., & Wittenbrink, B. (2002). The police
officer’s dilemma: Using ethnicity to disambiguate potentially
threatening individuals. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
83*, 1314–1329.

Correll, J., Urland, G. R., & Ito, T. A. (2006). Event-related
potentials and the decision to shoot: The role of threat perception and
cognitive control. *The Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 42*,
120–128.

Dunkle T. (1982). The sound of silence. *Science, 82*, 30–33.

Fawcett, S. L., Wang, Y., & Birch, E. E. (2005). The critical period for
susceptibility of human stereopsis. *Investigative Ophthalmology and
Visual Science, 46*, 521–525.

Furlow, F. B. (1996, 2012). The smell of love. Retrieved from
http://www.psychologytoday.com/articles/200910/the-smell-love

Galanter, E. (1962). Contemporary Psychophysics. In R. Brown,
E.Galanter, E. H. Hess, & G. Mandler (Eds.), New directions in
psychology. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

Garland, E. L. (2012). Pain processing in the human nervous system: A
selective review of nociceptive and biobehavioral pathways. *Primary
Care, 39*, 561–571.

Goolkasian, P. & Woodbury, C. (2010). Priming effects with ambiguous
figures. *Attention,* *Perception & Psychophysics, 72*, 168–178.

Grothe, B., Pecka, M., & McAlpine, D. (2010). Mechanisms of sound
localization in mammals. *Physiological Reviews, 90*, 983–1012.

Hartline, P. H., Kass, L., & Loop, M. S. (1978). Merging of modalities
in the optic tectum: Infrared and visual integration in rattlesnakes.
*Science, 199*, 1225–1229.

Kaiser, P. K. (1997). *The joy of visual perception: A web book*.
Retrieved from http://www.yorku.ca/eye/noframes.htm

Khan, S., & Chang, R. (2013). Anatomy of the vestibular system: A
review. *NeuroRehabilitation, 32*, 437–443.

Kinnamon, S. C., & Vandenbeuch, A. (2009). Receptors and transduction of
umami taste stimuli. *Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1170*,
55–59.

Kunst-Wilson, W. R., & Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Affective discrimination of
stimuli that cannot be recognized. *Science, 207*, 557–558.

Lackner, J. R., & DiZio, P. (2005). Vestibular, proprioceptive, and
haptic contributions to spatial orientation. *Annual Review of
Psychology, 56*, 115–147.

Land, E. H. (1959). Color vision and the natural image. Part 1.
*Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 45*\ (1), 115–129.

Liem, D. G., Westerbeek, A., Wolterink, S., Kok, F. J., & de Graaf, C.
(2004). Sour taste preferences of children relate to preference for
novel and intense stimuli. *Chemical Senses, 29*, 713–720.

Lodovichi, C., & Belluscio, L. (2012). Odorant receptors in the
formation of olfactory bulb circuitry. *Physiology, 27*, 200–212.

Loersch, C., Durso, G. R. O., & Petty, R. E. (2013). Vicissitudes of
desire: A matching mechanism for subliminal persuasion. *Social
Psychological and Personality Science, 4*\ (5), 624–631.

Maffei, A., Haley, M., & Fontanini, A. (2012). Neural processing of
gustatory information in insular circuits. *Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 22*, 709–716.

Milner, A. D., & Goodale, M. A. (2008). Two visual systems re-viewed.
*Neuropsychological, 46*, 774–785.

Mizushige, T., Inoue, K., Fushiki, T. (2007). Why is fat so tasty?
Chemical reception of fatty acid on the tongue. *Journal of Nutritional
Science and Vitaminology, 53*, 1–4.

Most, S. B., Simons, D. J., Scholl, B. J., & Chabris, C. F. (2000).
Sustained inattentional blindness: The role of location in the detection
of unexpected dynamic events. *PSYCHE, 6*\ (14).

Nelson, M. R. (2008). The hidden persuaders: Then and now. *Journal of
Advertising, 37*\ (1), 113–126.

Niimura, Y., & Nei, M. (2007). Extensive gains and losses of olfactory
receptor genes in mammalian evolution. *PLoS ONE, 2*, e708.

Okawa, H., & Sampath, A. P. (2007). Optimization of single-photon
response transmission at the rod-to-rod bipolar synapse. *Physiology,
22*, 279–286.

Payne, B. K. (2001). Prejudice and perception: The role of automatic and
controlled processes in misperceiving a weapon. *Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 81*, 181–192.

Payne, B. K., Shimizu, Y., & Jacoby, L. L. (2005). Mental control and
visual illusions: Toward explaining race-biased weapon
misidentifications. *Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 41*,
36–47.

Peck, M. (2012, July 19). *How a movie changed one man’s vision
forever*. Retrieved from
http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20120719-awoken-from-a-2d-world

Peterson, M. A., & Gibson, B. S. (1994). Must figure-ground organization
precede object recognition? An assumption in peril. *Psychological
Science, 5*, 253–259.

Petho, G., & Reeh, P. W. (2012). Sensory and signaling mechanisms of
bradykinin, eicosanoids, platelet-activating factor, and nitric oxide in
peripheral nociceptors. *Physiological Reviews, 92*, 1699–1775.

Proske, U. (2006). Kinesthesia: The role of muscle receptors. *Muscle &
Nerve, 34*, 545–558.

Proske, U., & Gandevia, S. C. (2012). The proprioceptive senses: Their
roles in signaling body shape, body position and movement, and muscle
force. *Physiological Reviews, 92*, 1651–1697.

Purvis, K., & Haynes, N. B. (1972). The effect of female rat proximity
on the reproductive system of male rats. *Physiology & Behavior, 9*,
401–407.

Radel, R., Sarrazin, P., Legrain, P., & Gobancé, L. (2009). Subliminal
priming of motivational orientation in educational settings: Effect on
academic performance moderated by mindfulness. *Journal of Research in
Personality, 43*\ (4), 1–18.

Rauschecker, J. P., & Tian, B. (2000). Mechanisms and streams for
processing “what” and “where” in auditory cortex. *Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 97*, 11800–11806.

Renier, L. A., Anurova, I., De Volder, A. G., Carlson, S., VanMeter, J.,
& Rauschecker, J. P. (2009). Multisensory integration of sounds and
vibrotactile stimuli in processing streams for “what” and “where.”
*Journal of Neuroscience, 29*, 10950–10960.

Rensink, R. A. (2004). Visual sensing without seeing. *Psychological
Science, 15*, 27–32.

Rock, I., & Palmer, S. (1990). The legacy of Gestalt psychology.
*Scientific American, 262*, 84–90.

Roper, S. D. (2013). Taste buds as peripheral chemosensory receptors.
*Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology, 24*, 71–79.

Russell, M. J. (1976). Human olfactory communication. *Nature, 260*,
520–522.

Sachs, B. D. (1997). Erection evoked in male rats by airborne scent from
estrous females. *Physiology & Behavior, 62*, 921–924.

Segall, M. H., Campbell, D. T., & Herskovits, M. J. (1963). Cultural
differences in the perception of geometric illusions. *Science, 139*,
769–771.

Segall, M. H., Campbell, D. T., & Herskovits, M. J. (1966). The
influence of culture on visual perception. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.

Segall, M. H., Dasen, P. P., Berry, J. W., & Poortinga, Y. H. (1999).
*Human behavior in global perspective* (2nd ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Semaan, M. T., & Megerian, C. A. (2010). Contemporary perspectives on
the pathophysiology of Meniere’s disease: implications for treatment.
*Current opinion in Otolaryngology & Head and Neck Surgery, 18*\ (5),
392–398.

Shamma, S. (2001). On the role of space and time in auditory processing.
*Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5*, 340–348.

Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). Gorillas in our midst: Sustained
inattentional blindness for dynamic events. *Perception, 28*, 1059–1074.

Spors, H., Albeanu, D. F., Murthy, V. N., Rinberg, D., Uchida, N.,
Wachowiak, M., & Friedrich, R. W. (2013). Illuminating vertebrate
olfactory processing. *Journal of Neuroscience, 32*, 14102–14108.

Spray, D. C. (1986). Cutaneous temperature receptors. *Annual Review of
Physiology, 48*, 625–638.

Strain, G. M. (2003). *How well do dogs and other animals hear?*
Retrieved from http://www.lsu.edu/deafness/HearingRange.html

Swets, J. A. (1964). Signal detection and recognition by human
observers. *Psychological Bulletin, 60*, 429–441.

Ungerleider, L. G., & Haxby, J. V. (1994). ‘What’ and ‘where’ in the
human brain. *Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 4*, 157–165.

U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2013). Genetics home reference:
Congenital insensitivity to pain. Retrieved from
http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/congenital-insensitivity-to-pain

Vecera, S. P., & O’Reilly, R. C. (1998). Figure-ground organization and
object recognition processes: An interactive account. *Journal of
Experimental Psychology-Human Perception and Performance, 24*, 441–462.

Wakakuwa, M., Stavenga, D. G., & Arikawa, K. (2007). Spectral
organization of ommatidia in flower-visiting insects. *Photochemistry
and Photobiology, 83*, 27–34.

Weller, A. (1998). Human pheromones: Communication through body
odour\ *. Nature, 392*, 126–127.

Wells, D. L. (2010). Domestic dogs and human health: An overview.
*British Journal of Health Psychology, 12*, 145–156.

Wolfgang-Kimball, D. (1992). Pheromones in humans: myth or reality?.
Retrieved from http://www.anapsid.org/pheromones.html

Wysocki, C. J., & Preti, G. (2004). Facts, fallacies, fears, and
frustrations with human pheromones. *The Anatomical Record Part A:
Discoveries in Molecular, Cellular, and Evolutionary Biology, 281*,
1201–1211.

.. |A photograph shows a person playing a piano on the sidewalk near a busy intersection in a city.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_05_00_Senses.jpg
