=======
Hearing
=======



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Describe the
   basic anatomy and function of the auditory system \* Explain how we
   encode and perceive pitch \* Discuss how we localize sound

Our auditory system converts pressure waves into meaningful sounds. This
translates into our ability to hear the sounds of nature, to appreciate
the beauty of music, and to communicate with one another through spoken
language. This section will provide an overview of the basic anatomy and
function of the auditory system. It will include a discussion of how the
sensory stimulus is translated into neural impulses, where in the brain
that information is processed, how we perceive pitch, and how we know
where sound is coming from.

ANATOMY OF THE AUDITORY SYSTEM
==============================

The ear can be separated into multiple sections. The outer ear includes
the **pinna**\ {: data-type=“term”}, which is the visible part of the
ear that protrudes from our heads, the auditory canal, and the
**tympanic membrane**\ {: data-type=“term”}, or eardrum. The middle ear
contains three tiny bones known as the **ossicles**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, which are named the **malleus**\ {: data-type=“term”}
(or hammer), **incus**\ {: data-type=“term”} (or anvil), and the
**stapes**\ {: data-type=“term”} (or stirrup). The inner ear contains
the semi-circular canals, which are involved in balance and movement
(the vestibular sense), and the cochlea. The **cochlea**\ {:
data-type=“term”} is a fluid-filled, snail-shaped structure that
contains the sensory receptor cells (hair cells) of the auditory system
(`[link] <#Figure_05_04_Ear>`__).

|An illustration shows sound waves entering the “auditory canal” and
traveling to the inner ear. The locations of the “pinna,” “tympanic
membrane (eardrum)” are labeled, as well as parts of the inner ear: the
“ossicles” and its subparts, the “malleus,” “incus,” and “stapes.” A
callout leads to a close-up illustration of the inner ear that shows the
locations of the “semicircular canals,” “uticle,” “oval window,”
“saccule,” “cochlea,” and the “basilar membrane and hair cells.”|\ {:
#Figure_05_04_Ear}

Sound waves travel along the auditory canal and strike the tympanic
membrane, causing it to vibrate. This vibration results in movement of
the three ossicles. As the ossicles move, the stapes presses into a thin
membrane of the cochlea known as the oval window. As the stapes presses
into the oval window, the fluid inside the cochlea begins to move, which
in turn stimulates **hair cells**\ {: data-type=“term”}, which are
auditory receptor cells of the inner ear embedded in the basilar
membrane. The **basilar membrane**\ {: data-type=“term”} is a thin strip
of tissue within the cochlea.

The activation of hair cells is a mechanical process: the stimulation of
the hair cell ultimately leads to activation of the cell. As hair cells
become activated, they generate neural impulses that travel along the
auditory nerve to the brain. Auditory information is shuttled to the
inferior colliculus, the medial geniculate nucleus of the thalamus, and
finally to the auditory cortex in the temporal lobe of the brain for
processing. Like the visual system, there is also evidence suggesting
that information about auditory recognition and localization is
processed in parallel streams (Rauschecker & Tian, 2000; Renier et al.,
2009).

PITCH PERCEPTION
================

Different frequencies of sound waves are associated with differences in
our perception of the pitch of those sounds. Low-frequency sounds are
lower pitched, and high-frequency sounds are higher pitched. How does
the auditory system differentiate among various pitches?

Several theories have been proposed to account for pitch perception.
We’ll discuss two of them here: temporal theory and place theory. The
**temporal theory**\ {: data-type=“term”} of pitch perception asserts
that frequency is coded by the activity level of a sensory neuron. This
would mean that a given hair cell would fire action potentials related
to the frequency of the sound wave. While this is a very intuitive
explanation, we detect such a broad range of frequencies (20–20,000 Hz)
that the frequency of action potentials fired by hair cells cannot
account for the entire range. Because of properties related to sodium
channels on the neuronal membrane that are involved in action
potentials, there is a point at which a cell cannot fire any faster
(Shamma, 2001).

The **place theory**\ {: data-type=“term”} of pitch perception suggests
that different portions of the basilar membrane are sensitive to sounds
of different frequencies. More specifically, the base of the basilar
membrane responds best to high frequencies and the tip of the basilar
membrane responds best to low frequencies. Therefore, hair cells that
are in the base portion would be labeled as high-pitch receptors, while
those in the tip of basilar membrane would be labeled as low-pitch
receptors (Shamma, 2001).

In reality, both theories explain different aspects of pitch perception.
At frequencies up to about 4000 Hz, it is clear that both the rate of
action potentials and place contribute to our perception of pitch.
However, much higher frequency sounds can only be encoded using place
cues (Shamma, 2001).

SOUND LOCALIZATION
==================

The ability to locate sound in our environments is an important part of
**hearing**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}. Localizing sound could
be considered similar to the way that we perceive depth in our visual
fields. Like the monocular and binocular cues that provided information
about depth, the auditory system uses both **monaural**\ {:
data-type=“term”} (one-eared) and **binaural**\ {: data-type=“term”}
(two-eared) cues to localize sound.

Each pinna interacts with incoming sound waves differently, depending on
the sound’s source relative to our bodies. This interaction provides a
monaural cue that is helpful in locating sounds that occur above or
below and in front or behind us. The sound waves received by your two
ears from sounds that come from directly above, below, in front, or
behind you would be identical; therefore, monaural cues are essential
(Grothe, Pecka, & McAlpine, 2010).

Binaural cues, on the other hand, provide information on the location of
a sound along a horizontal axis by relying on differences in patterns of
vibration of the eardrum between our two ears. If a sound comes from an
off-center location, it creates two types of binaural cues: interaural
level differences and interaural timing differences. **Interaural level
difference**\ {: data-type=“term”} refers to the fact that a sound
coming from the right side of your body is more intense at your right
ear than at your left ear because of the attenuation of the sound wave
as it passes through your head. **Interaural timing difference**\ {:
data-type=“term”} refers to the small difference in the time at which a
given sound wave arrives at each ear
(`[link] <#Figure_05_04_MonInt>`__). Certain brain areas monitor these
differences to construct where along a horizontal axis a sound
originates (Grothe et al., 2010).

|A photograph of jets has an illustration of arced waves labeled “sound”
coming from the jets. These extend to an outline of a human head, with
arrows from the jets identifying the location of each ear.|\ {:
#Figure_05_04_MonInt}

HEARING LOSS
============

**Deafness**\ {: data-type=“term”} is the partial or complete inability
to hear. Some people are born deaf, which is known as **congenital
deafness**\ {: data-type=“term”}. Many others begin to suffer from
**conductive hearing loss**\ {: data-type=“term”} because of age,
genetic predisposition, or environmental effects, including exposure to
extreme noise (noise-induced hearing loss, as shown in
`[link] <#Figure_05_04_EnFactors>`__), certain illnesses (such as
measles or mumps), or damage due to toxins (such as those found in
certain solvents and metals).

|Photograph A shows a rock band performing on stage and a sign reading
“The Black Keys.” Photograph B shows a construction worker operating a
jackhammer.|\ {: #Figure_05_04_EnFactors}

Given the mechanical nature by which the sound wave stimulus is
transmitted from the eardrum through the ossicles to the oval window of
the cochlea, some degree of hearing loss is inevitable. With conductive
hearing loss, hearing problems are associated with a failure in the
vibration of the eardrum and/or movement of the ossicles. These problems
are often dealt with through devices like hearing aids that amplify
incoming sound waves to make vibration of the eardrum and movement of
the ossicles more likely to occur.

When the hearing problem is associated with a failure to transmit neural
signals from the cochlea to the brain, it is called **sensorineural
hearing loss**\ {: data-type=“term”}. One disease that results in
sensorineural hearing loss is **Ménière's disease**\ {:
data-type=“term”}. Although not well understood, Ménière's disease
results in a degeneration of inner ear structures that can lead to
hearing loss, tinnitus (constant ringing or buzzing), **vertigo**\ {:
data-type=“term”} (a sense of spinning), and an increase in pressure
within the inner ear (Semaan & Megerian, 2011). This kind of loss cannot
be treated with hearing aids, but some individuals might be candidates
for a cochlear implant as a treatment option. **Cochlear implants**\ {:
data-type=“term”} are electronic devices that consist of a microphone, a
speech processor, and an electrode array. The device receives incoming
sound information and directly stimulates the auditory nerve to transmit
information to the brain.

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Watch this `video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AqXBrKwB96E>`__
   describe cochlear implant surgeries and how they work.

.. container:: psychology what-do-you-think

   .. container::

      Deaf Culture

   In the United States and other places around the world, deaf people
   have their own language, schools, and customs. This is called **deaf
   culture**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}. In the United States,
   deaf individuals often communicate using American Sign Language
   (ASL); ASL has no verbal component and is based entirely on visual
   signs and gestures. The primary mode of communication is signing. One
   of the values of deaf culture is to continue traditions like using
   sign language rather than teaching deaf children to try to speak,
   read lips, or have cochlear implant surgery.

   When a child is diagnosed as deaf, parents have difficult decisions
   to make. Should the child be enrolled in mainstream schools and
   taught to verbalize and read lips? Or should the child be sent to a
   school for deaf children to learn ASL and have significant exposure
   to deaf culture? Do you think there might be differences in the way
   that parents approach these decisions depending on whether or not
   they are also deaf?

Summary
=======

Sound waves are funneled into the auditory canal and cause vibrations of
the eardrum; these vibrations move the ossicles. As the ossicles move,
the stapes presses against the oval window of the cochlea, which causes
fluid inside the cochlea to move. As a result, hair cells embedded in
the basilar membrane become enlarged, which sends neural impulses to the
brain via the auditory nerve.

Pitch perception and sound localization are important aspects of
hearing. Our ability to perceive pitch relies on both the firing rate of
the hair cells in the basilar membrane as well as their location within
the membrane. In terms of sound localization, both monaural and binaural
cues are used to locate where sounds originate in our environment.

Individuals can be born deaf, or they can develop deafness as a result
of age, genetic predisposition, and/or environmental causes. Hearing
loss that results from a failure of the vibration of the eardrum or the
resultant movement of the ossicles is called conductive hearing loss.
Hearing loss that involves a failure of the transmission of auditory
nerve impulses to the brain is called sensorineural hearing loss.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Hair cells located near the base of the basilar membrane respond
      best to \_______\_ sounds.

      1. low-frequency
      2. high-frequency
      3. low-amplitude
      4. high-amplitude {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      The three ossicles of the middle ear are known as \________.

      1. malleus, incus, and stapes
      2. hammer, anvil, and stirrup
      3. pinna, cochlea, and utricle
      4. both a and b {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      Hearing aids might be effective for treating \________.

      1. Ménière’s disease
      2. sensorineural hearing loss
      3. conductive hearing loss
      4. interaural time differences {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      Cues that require two ears are referred to as \_______\_ cues.

      1. monocular
      2. monaural
      3. binocular
      4. binaural {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

Critical Thinking Question
==========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Given what you’ve read about sound localization, from an
      evolutionary perspective, how does sound localization facilitate
      survival?

   .. container::

      Sound localization would have allowed early humans to locate prey
      and protect themselves from predators.

.. container::

   .. container::

      How can temporal and place theories both be used to explain our
      ability to perceive the pitch of sound waves with frequencies up
      to 4000 Hz?

   .. container::

      Pitch of sounds below this threshold could be encoded by the
      combination of the place and firing rate of stimulated hair cells.
      So, in general, hair cells located near the tip of the basilar
      membrane would signal that we’re dealing with a lower-pitched
      sound. However, differences in firing rates of hair cells within
      this location could allow for fine discrimination between low-,
      medium-, and high-pitch sounds within the larger low-pitch
      context.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      If you had to choose to lose either your vision or your hearing,
      which would you choose and why?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   basilar membrane
      thin strip of tissue within the cochlea that contains the hair
      cells which serve as the sensory receptors for the auditory system
      ^
   binaural cue
      two-eared cue to localize sound ^
   cochlea
      fluid-filled, snail-shaped structure that contains the sensory
      receptor cells of the auditory system ^
   cochlear implant
      electronic device that consists of a microphone, a speech
      processor, and an electrode array to directly stimulate the
      auditory nerve to transmit information to the brain ^
   conductive hearing loss
      failure in the vibration of the eardrum and/or movement of the
      ossicles ^
   congenital deafness
      deafness from birth ^
   deafness
      partial or complete inability to hear ^
   hair cell
      auditory receptor cell of the inner ear ^
   incus
      middle ear ossicle; also known as the anvil ^
   interaural level difference
      sound coming from one side of the body is more intense at the
      closest ear because of the attenuation of the sound wave as it
      passes through the head ^
   interaural timing difference
      small difference in the time at which a given sound wave arrives
      at each ear ^
   malleus
      middle ear ossicle; also known as the hammer ^
   Ménière's disease
      results in a degeneration of inner ear structures that can lead to
      hearing loss, tinnitus, vertigo, and an increase in pressure
      within the inner ear ^
   monaural cue
      one-eared cue to localize sound ^
   pinna
      visible part of the ear that protrudes from the head ^
   place theory of pitch perception
      different portions of the basilar membrane are sensitive to sounds
      of different frequencies ^
   sensorineural hearing loss
      failure to transmit neural signals from the cochlea to the brain ^
   stapes
      middle ear ossicle; also known as the stirrup ^
   temporal theory of pitch perception
      sound’s frequency is coded by the activity level of a sensory
      neuron ^
   tympanic membrane
      eardrum ^
   vertigo
      spinning sensation

.. |An illustration shows sound waves entering the “auditory canal” and traveling to the inner ear. The locations of the “pinna,” “tympanic membrane (eardrum)” are labeled, as well as parts of the inner ear: the “ossicles” and its subparts, the “malleus,” “incus,” and “stapes.” A callout leads to a close-up illustration of the inner ear that shows the locations of the “semicircular canals,” “uticle,” “oval window,” “saccule,” “cochlea,” and the “basilar membrane and hair cells.”| image:: ../resources/ear_new.jpg
.. |A photograph of jets has an illustration of arced waves labeled “sound” coming from the jets. These extend to an outline of a human head, with arrows from the jets identifying the location of each ear.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_05_04_MonInt.jpg
.. |Photograph A shows a rock band performing on stage and a sign reading “The Black Keys.” Photograph B shows a construction worker operating a jackhammer.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_05_04_EnFactors.jpg
