===============
Stages of Sleep
===============



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Differentiate
   between REM and non-REM sleep \* Describe the differences between the
   four stages of non-REM sleep \* Understand the role that REM and
   non-REM sleep play in learning and memory

Sleep is not a uniform state of being. Instead, sleep is composed of
several different stages that can be differentiated from one another by
the patterns of brain wave activity that occur during each stage. These
changes in brain wave activity can be visualized using EEG and are
distinguished from one another by both the frequency and amplitude of
brain waves (`[link] <#Figure_04_03_SleepCycle>`__). Sleep can be
divided into two different general phases: REM sleep and non-REM (NREM)
sleep. **Rapid eye movement (REM)**\ {: data-type=“term”} sleep is
characterized by darting movements of the eyes under closed eyelids.
Brain waves during REM sleep appear very similar to brain waves during
wakefulness. In contrast, **non-REM (NREM)**\ {: data-type=“term”} sleep
is subdivided into four stages distinguished from each other and from
wakefulness by characteristic patterns of brain waves. The first four
stages of sleep are NREM sleep, while the fifth and final stage of sleep
is REM sleep. In this section, we will discuss each of these stages of
sleep and their associated patterns of brain wave activity.

|A photograph shows a person sleeping. Superimposed across the top of
the picture is a line representing brainwave activity across the five
stages of sleep. Above the line, from left to right, it reads stage 1,
stage 2, stage 3, stage 4, and stage 5. The wave amplitude is highest in
late stage 2, and near the end of stage 3 through stage 4. The
wavelength I longer from late stage 2 through stage 4.|\ {:
#Figure_04_03_SleepCycle}

NREM STAGES OF SLEEP
====================

The first stage of NREM sleep is known as stage 1 sleep. **Stage 1
sleep**\ {: data-type=“term”} is a transitional phase that occurs
between wakefulness and sleep, the period during which we drift off to
sleep. During this time, there is a slowdown in both the rates of
respiration and heartbeat. In addition, stage 1 sleep involves a marked
decrease in both overall muscle tension and core body temperature.

In terms of brain wave activity, stage 1 sleep is associated with both
alpha and theta waves. The early portion of stage 1 sleep produces
**alpha waves**\ {: data-type=“term”}, which are relatively low
frequency (8–13Hz), high amplitude patterns of electrical activity
(waves) that become synchronized (`[link] <#Figure_04_03_Stages>`__).
This pattern of brain wave activity resembles that of someone who is
very relaxed, yet awake. As an individual continues through stage 1
sleep, there is an increase in theta wave activity. **Theta waves**\ {:
data-type=“term”} are even lower frequency (4–7 Hz), higher amplitude
brain waves than alpha waves. It is relatively easy to wake someone from
stage 1 sleep; in fact, people often report that they have not been
asleep if they are awoken during stage 1 sleep.

|A graph has a y-axis labeled “EEG” and an x-axis labeled “time
(seconds.) Plotted along the y-axis and moving upward are the stages of
sleep. First is REM, followed by Stage 3 and 4 NREM Delta, Stage 2 NREM
Theta (sleep spindles; K-complexes), Stage 1 NREM Alpha, and Awake.
Charted on the x axis is Time in seconds from 2–20 in 2 second
intervals. Each sleep stage has associated wavelengths of varying
amplitude and frequency. Relative to the others, “awake” has a very
close wavelength and a medium amplitude. Stage 1 is characterized by a
generally uniform wavelength and a relatively low amplitude which
doubles and quickly reverts to normal every 2 seconds. Stage 2 is
comprised of a similar wavelength as stage 1. It introduces the
K-complex from seconds 10 through 12 which is a short burst of doubled
or tripled amplitude and decreased wavelength. Stages 3 and 4 have a
more uniform wave with gradually increasing amplitude. Finally, REM
sleep looks much like stage 2 without the K-complex.|\ {:
#Figure_04_03_Stages}

As we move into **stage 2 sleep**\ {: data-type=“term”}, the body goes
into a state of deep relaxation. Theta waves still dominate the activity
of the brain, but they are interrupted by brief bursts of activity known
as sleep spindles (`[link] <#Figure_04_03_Stage2>`__). A **sleep
spindle**\ {: data-type=“term”} is a rapid burst of higher frequency
brain waves that may be important for learning and memory (Fogel &
Smith, 2011; Poe, Walsh, & Bjorness, 2010). In addition, the appearance
of K-complexes is often associated with stage 2 sleep. A
**K-complex**\ {: data-type=“term”} is a very high amplitude pattern of
brain activity that may in some cases occur in response to environmental
stimuli. Thus, K-complexes might serve as a bridge to higher levels of
arousal in response to what is going on in our environments (Halász,
1993; Steriade & Amzica, 1998).

|A graph has an x-axis labeled “time” and a y-axis labeled “voltage. A
line illustrates brainwaves, with two areas labeled “sleep spindle” and
“k-complex”. The area labeled “sleep spindle” has decreased wavelength
and moderately increased amplitude, while the area labeled “k-complex”
has significantly high amplitude and longer wavelength.|\ {:
#Figure_04_03_Stage2}

**Stage 3**\ {: data-type=“term”} and **stage 4**\ {: data-type=“term”}
of sleep are often referred to as deep sleep or slow-wave sleep because
these stages are characterized by low frequency (up to 4 Hz), high
amplitude **delta waves**\ {: data-type=“term”}
(`[link] <#Figure_04_03_Deltawaves>`__). During this time, an
individual’s heart rate and respiration slow dramatically. It is much
more difficult to awaken someone from sleep during stage 3 and stage 4
than during earlier stages. Interestingly, individuals who have
increased levels of alpha brain wave activity (more often associated
with wakefulness and transition into stage 1 sleep) during stage 3 and
stage 4 often report that they do not feel refreshed upon waking,
regardless of how long they slept (Stone, Taylor, McCrae, Kalsekar, &
Lichstein, 2008).

|Polysonograph a shows the pattern of delta waves, which are low
frequency and high amplitude. Delta waves are found mostly in stages 3
and 4 of sleep. Chart b shows brainwaves at various stages of sleep,
with stages 3 and 4 highlighted.|\ {: #Figure_04_03_Deltawaves}

REM SLEEP
=========

As mentioned earlier, REM sleep is marked by rapid movements of the
eyes. The brain waves associated with this stage of sleep are very
similar to those observed when a person is awake, as shown in
`[link] <#Figure_04_03_REM>`__, and this is the period of sleep in which
dreaming occurs. It is also associated with paralysis of muscle systems
in the body with the exception of those that make circulation and
respiration possible. Therefore, no movement of voluntary muscles occurs
during REM sleep in a normal individual; REM sleep is often referred to
as paradoxical sleep because of this combination of high brain activity
and lack of muscle tone. Like NREM sleep, REM has been implicated in
various aspects of learning and memory (Wagner, Gais, & Born, 2001),
although there is disagreement within the scientific community about how
important both NREM and REM sleep are for normal learning and memory
(Siegel, 2001).

|Chart A is a polysonograph with the period of rapid eye movement (REM)
highlighted.Chart b is a shows brainwaves at various stages of sleep,
with the “awake” stage highlighted to show its similarity to the wave
pattern of “REM” in part A.|\ {: #Figure_04_03_REM}

If people are deprived of REM sleep and then allowed to sleep without
disturbance, they will spend more time in REM sleep in what would appear
to be an effort to recoup the lost time in REM. This is known as the REM
rebound, and it suggests that REM sleep is also homeostatically
regulated. Aside from the role that REM sleep may play in processes
related to learning and memory, REM sleep may also be involved in
emotional processing and regulation. In such instances, REM rebound may
actually represent an adaptive response to stress in nondepressed
individuals by suppressing the emotional salience of aversive events
that occurred in wakefulness (Suchecki, Tiba, & Machado, 2012).

While sleep deprivation in general is associated with a number of
negative consequences (Brown, 2012), the consequences of REM deprivation
appear to be less profound (as discussed in Siegel, 2001). In fact, some
have suggested that REM deprivation can actually be beneficial in some
circumstances. For instance, REM sleep deprivation has been demonstrated
to improve symptoms of people suffering from major depression, and many
effective antidepressant medications suppress REM sleep (Riemann,
Berger, & Volderholzer, 2001; Vogel, 1975).

It should be pointed out that some reviews of the literature challenge
this finding, suggesting that sleep deprivation that is not limited to
REM sleep is just as effective or more effective at alleviating
depressive symptoms among some patients suffering from depression. In
either case, why sleep deprivation improves the mood of some patients is
not entirely understood (Giedke & Schwärzler, 2002). Recently, however,
some have suggested that sleep deprivation might change emotional
processing so that various stimuli are more likely to be perceived as
positive in nature (Gujar, Yoo, Hu, & Walker, 2011). The hypnogram below
(`[link] <#Figure_04_03_Hypnogram>`__) shows a person’s passage through
the stages of sleep.

|This is a hypnogram showing the transitions of the sleep cycle during a
typical eight hour period of sleep. During the first hour, the person
goes through stages 1,2,3 and ends at 4. In the second hour, sleep
oscillates between 3 and 4 before attaining a 30-minute period of REM
sleep. The third hour follows the same pattern as the second, but ends
with a brief awake period. The fourth hour follows a similar pattern as
the third, with a slightly longer REM stage. In the fifth hour, stages 3
and 4 are no longer reached. The sleep stages are fluctuating from 2, to
1, to REM, to awake, and then they repeat with shortening intervals
until the end of the eighth hour when the person awakens.|\ {:
#Figure_04_03_Hypnogram}

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   View this `video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kaoMD1XI5u8>`__
   that describes the various stages of sleep.

Dreams
------

The meaning of dreams varies across different cultures and periods of
time. By the late 19th century, German psychiatrist Sigmund
**Freud**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} had become convinced that
dreams represented an opportunity to gain access to the unconscious. By
analyzing dreams, Freud thought people could increase self-awareness and
gain valuable insight to help them deal with the problems they faced in
their lives. Freud made distinctions between the manifest content and
the latent content of dreams. **Manifest content**\ {: data-type=“term”}
is the actual content, or storyline, of a dream. **Latent content**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, on the other hand, refers to the hidden meaning of a
dream. For instance, if a woman dreams about being chased by a snake,
Freud might have argued that this represents the woman’s fear of sexual
intimacy, with the snake serving as a symbol of a man’s penis.

Freud was not the only theorist to focus on the content of dreams. The
20th century Swiss psychiatrist Carl Jung believed that dreams allowed
us to tap into the collective unconscious. The **collective
unconscious**\ {: data-type=“term”}, as described by **Jung**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}, is a theoretical repository of
information he believed to be shared by everyone. According to Jung,
certain symbols in dreams reflected universal archetypes with meanings
that are similar for all people regardless of culture or location.

The sleep and dreaming researcher Rosalind Cartwright, however, believes
that dreams simply reflect life events that are important to the
dreamer. Unlike Freud and Jung, Cartwright’s ideas about dreaming have
found empirical support. For example, she and her colleagues published a
study in which women going through divorce were asked several times over
a five month period to report the degree to which their former spouses
were on their minds. These same women were awakened during REM sleep in
order to provide a detailed account of their dream content. There was a
significant positive correlation between the degree to which women
thought about their former spouses during waking hours and the number of
times their former spouses appeared as characters in their dreams
(Cartwright, Agargun, Kirkby, & Friedman, 2006). Recent research
(Horikawa, Tamaki, Miyawaki, & Kamitani, 2013) has uncovered new
techniques by which researchers may effectively detect and classify the
visual images that occur during dreaming by using fMRI for neural
measurement of brain activity patterns, opening the way for additional
research in this area.

Recently, neuroscientists have also become interested in understanding
why we dream. For example, Hobson (2009) suggests that dreaming may
represent a state of protoconsciousness. In other words, dreaming
involves constructing a virtual reality in our heads that we might use
to help us during wakefulness. Among a variety of neurobiological
evidence, John Hobson cites research on lucid dreams as an opportunity
to better understand dreaming in general. **Lucid dreams**\ {:
data-type=“term”} are dreams in which certain aspects of wakefulness are
maintained during a dream state. In a lucid dream, a person becomes
aware of the fact that they are dreaming, and as such, they can control
the dream’s content (LaBerge, 1990).

Summary
=======

The different stages of sleep are characterized by the patterns of brain
waves associated with each stage. As a person transitions from being
awake to falling asleep, alpha waves are replaced by theta waves. Sleep
spindles and K-complexes emerge in stage 2 sleep. Stage 3 and stage 4
are described as slow-wave sleep that is marked by a predominance of
delta waves. REM sleep involves rapid movements of the eyes, paralysis
of voluntary muscles, and dreaming. Both NREM and REM sleep appear to
play important roles in learning and memory. Dreams may represent life
events that are important to the dreamer. Alternatively, dreaming may
represent a state of protoconsciousness, or a virtual reality, in the
mind that helps a person during consciousness.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      \_______\_ is(are) described as slow-wave sleep.

      1. stage 1
      2. stage 2
      3. stage 3 and stage 4
      4. REM sleep {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      Sleep spindles and K-complexes are most often associated with
      \_______\_ sleep.

      1. stage 1
      2. stage 2
      3. stage 3 and stage 4
      4. REM {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      Symptoms of \_______\_ may be improved by REM deprivation.

      1. schizophrenia
      2. Parkinson’s disease
      3. depression
      4. generalized anxiety disorder {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      The \_______\_ content of a dream refers to the true meaning of
      the dream.

      1. latent
      2. manifest
      3. collective unconscious
      4. important {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Freud believed that dreams provide important insight into the
      unconscious mind. He maintained that a dream’s manifest content
      could provide clues into an individual’s unconscious. What
      potential criticisms exist for this particular perspective?

   .. container::

      The subjective nature of dream analysis is one criticism.
      Psychoanalysts are charged with helping their clients interpret
      the true meaning of a dream. There is no way to refute or confirm
      whether or not these interpretations are accurate. The notion that
      “sometimes a cigar is just a cigar” (sometimes attributed to Freud
      but not definitively shown to be his) makes it clear that there is
      no systematic, objective system in place for dream analysis.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Some people claim that sleepwalking and talking in your sleep
      involve individuals acting out their dreams. Why is this
      particular explanation unlikely?

   .. container::

      Dreaming occurs during REM sleep. One of the hallmarks of this
      particular stage of sleep is the paralysis of the voluntary
      musculature which would make acting out dreams improbable.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Researchers believe that one important function of sleep is to
      facilitate learning and memory. How does knowing this help you in
      your college studies? What changes could you make to your study
      and sleep habits to maximize your mastery of the material covered
      in class?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   alpha wave
      type of relatively low frequency, relatively high amplitude brain
      wave that becomes synchronized; characteristic of the beginning of
      stage 1 sleep ^
   delta wave
      type of low frequency, high amplitude brain wave characteristic of
      stage 3 and stage 4 sleep ^
   collective unconscious
      theoretical repository of information shared by all people across
      cultures, as described by Carl Jung ^
   K-complex
      very high amplitude pattern of brain activity associated with
      stage 2 sleep that may occur in response to environmental stimuli
      ^
   latent content
      hidden meaning of a dream, per Sigmund Freud’s view of the
      function of dreams ^
   lucid dream
      people become aware that they are dreaming and can control the
      dream’s content ^
   manifest content
      storyline of events that occur during a dream, per Sigmund Freud’s
      view of the function of dreams ^
   non-REM (NREM)
      period of sleep outside periods of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep
      ^
   rapid eye movement (REM) sleep
      period of sleep characterized by brain waves very similar to those
      during wakefulness and by darting movements of the eyes under
      closed eyelids ^
   sleep spindle
      rapid burst of high frequency brain waves during stage 2 sleep
      that may be important for learning and memory ^
   stage 1 sleep
      first stage of sleep; transitional phase that occurs between
      wakefulness and sleep; the period during which a person drifts off
      to sleep ^
   stage 2 sleep
      second stage of sleep; the body goes into deep relaxation;
      characterized by the appearance of sleep spindles ^
   stage 3 sleep
      third stage of sleep; deep sleep characterized by low frequency,
      high amplitude delta waves ^
   stage 4 sleep
      fourth stage of sleep; deep sleep characterized by low frequency,
      high amplitude delta waves ^
   theta wave
      type of low frequency, high amplitude brain wave characteristic of
      stage 1 and stage 2 sleep

.. |A photograph shows a person sleeping. Superimposed across the top of the picture is a line representing brainwave activity across the five stages of sleep. Above the line, from left to right, it reads stage 1, stage 2, stage 3, stage 4, and stage 5. The wave amplitude is highest in late stage 2, and near the end of stage 3 through stage 4. The wavelength I longer from late stage 2 through stage 4.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_04_03_SleepCycle.jpg
.. |A graph has a y-axis labeled “EEG” and an x-axis labeled “time (seconds.) Plotted along the y-axis and moving upward are the stages of sleep. First is REM, followed by Stage 3 and 4 NREM Delta, Stage 2 NREM Theta (sleep spindles; K-complexes), Stage 1 NREM Alpha, and Awake. Charted on the x axis is Time in seconds from 2–20 in 2 second intervals. Each sleep stage has associated wavelengths of varying amplitude and frequency. Relative to the others, “awake” has a very close wavelength and a medium amplitude. Stage 1 is characterized by a generally uniform wavelength and a relatively low amplitude which doubles and quickly reverts to normal every 2 seconds. Stage 2 is comprised of a similar wavelength as stage 1. It introduces the K-complex from seconds 10 through 12 which is a short burst of doubled or tripled amplitude and decreased wavelength. Stages 3 and 4 have a more uniform wave with gradually increasing amplitude. Finally, REM sleep looks much like stage 2 without the K-complex.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_04_03_Stages.jpg
.. |A graph has an x-axis labeled “time” and a y-axis labeled “voltage. A line illustrates brainwaves, with two areas labeled “sleep spindle” and “k-complex”. The area labeled “sleep spindle” has decreased wavelength and moderately increased amplitude, while the area labeled “k-complex” has significantly high amplitude and longer wavelength.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_04_03_Stage2.jpg
.. |Polysonograph a shows the pattern of delta waves, which are low frequency and high amplitude. Delta waves are found mostly in stages 3 and 4 of sleep. Chart b shows brainwaves at various stages of sleep, with stages 3 and 4 highlighted.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_04_03_Deltawaves.jpg
.. |Chart A is a polysonograph with the period of rapid eye movement (REM) highlighted.Chart b is a shows brainwaves at various stages of sleep, with the “awake” stage highlighted to show its similarity to the wave pattern of “REM” in part A.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_04_03_REM.jpg
.. |This is a hypnogram showing the transitions of the sleep cycle during a typical eight hour period of sleep. During the first hour, the person goes through stages 1,2,3 and ends at 4. In the second hour, sleep oscillates between 3 and 4 before attaining a 30-minute period of REM sleep. The third hour follows the same pattern as the second, but ends with a brief awake period. The fourth hour follows a similar pattern as the third, with a slightly longer REM stage. In the fifth hour, stages 3 and 4 are no longer reached. The sleep stages are fluctuating from 2, to 1, to REM, to awake, and then they repeat with shortening intervals until the end of the eighth hour when the person awakens.| image:: ../resources/01312017.jpg
