===========================
Parts of the Nervous System
===========================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Describe the
   difference between the central and peripheral nervous systems \*
   Explain the difference between the somatic and autonomic nervous
   systems \* Differentiate between the sympathetic and parasympathetic
   divisions of the autonomic nervous system

The **nervous system**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} can be divided
into two major subdivisions: the **central nervous system (CNS)**\ {:
data-type=“term”} and the **peripheral nervous system (PNS)**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, shown in `[link] <#CNX_Psych_03_03_NervSystem>`__.
The CNS is comprised of the brain and spinal cord; the PNS connects the
CNS to the rest of the body. In this section, we focus on the peripheral
nervous system; later, we look at the brain and spinal cord.

|Image (a) shows an outline of a human body with the brain and spinal
cord illustrated. Image (b) shows an outline of a human body with a
network of nerves depicted.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_03_03_NervSystem}

Peripheral Nervous System
=========================

The peripheral nervous system is made up of thick bundles of axons,
called nerves, carrying messages back and forth between the CNS and the
muscles, organs, and senses in the periphery of the body (i.e.,
everything outside the CNS). The PNS has two major subdivisions: the
somatic nervous system and the autonomic nervous system.

The **somatic nervous system**\ {: data-type=“term”} is associated with
activities traditionally thought of as conscious or voluntary. It is
involved in the relay of sensory and motor information to and from the
CNS; therefore, it consists of motor neurons and sensory neurons. Motor
neurons, carrying instructions from the CNS to the muscles, are efferent
fibers (efferent means “moving away from”). Sensory neurons, carrying
sensory information to the CNS, are afferent fibers (afferent means
“moving toward”). Each nerve is basically a two-way superhighway,
containing thousands of axons, both efferent and afferent.

The **autonomic nervous system**\ {: data-type=“term”} controls our
internal organs and glands and is generally considered to be outside the
realm of voluntary control. It can be further subdivided into the
sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions
(`[link] <#CNX_Psych_03_03_Autonomic>`__). The **sympathetic nervous
system**\ {: data-type=“term”} is involved in preparing the body for
stress-related activities; the **parasympathetic nervous system**\ {:
data-type=“term”} is associated with returning the body to routine,
day-to-day operations. The two systems have complementary functions,
operating in tandem to maintain the body’s homeostasis.
**Homeostasis**\ {: data-type=“term”} is a state of equilibrium, in
which biological conditions (such as body temperature) are maintained at
optimal levels.

|A diagram of a human body lists the different functions of the
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system. The parasympathetic
system can constrict pupils, stimulate salivation, slow heart rate,
constrict bronchi, stimulate digestion, stimulate bile secretion, and
cause the bladder to contract. The sympathetic nervous system can dilate
pupils, inhibit salivation, increase heart rate, dilate bronchi, inhibit
digestion, stimulate the breakdown of glycogen, stimulate secretion of
adrenaline and noradrenaline, and inhibit contraction of the
bladder.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_03_03_Autonomic}

The sympathetic nervous system is activated when we are faced with
stressful or high-arousal situations. The activity of this system was
adaptive for our ancestors, increasing their chances of survival.
Imagine, for example, that one of our early ancestors, out hunting small
game, suddenly disturbs a large bear with her cubs. At that moment, his
body undergoes a series of changes—a direct function of sympathetic
activation—preparing him to face the threat. His pupils dilate, his
heart rate and blood pressure increase, his bladder relaxes, his liver
releases glucose, and adrenaline surges into his bloodstream. This
constellation of physiological changes, known as the **fight or flight
response**\ {: data-type=“term”}, allows the body access to energy
reserves and heightened sensory capacity so that it might fight off a
threat or run away to safety.

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Reinforce what you’ve learned about the nervous system by playing
   this BBC-produced `interactive
   game <http://openstax.org/l/bbcgame>`__ about the nervous system.

While it is clear that such a response would be critical for survival
for our ancestors, who lived in a world full of real physical threats,
many of the high-arousal situations we face in the modern world are more
psychological in nature. For example, think about how you feel when you
have to stand up and give a presentation in front of a roomful of
people, or right before taking a big test. You are in no real physical
danger in those situations, and yet you have evolved to respond to any
perceived threat with the **fight or flight**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis} response. This kind of response is not nearly as adaptive
in the modern world; in fact, we suffer negative health consequences
when faced constantly with psychological threats that we can neither
fight nor flee. Recent research suggests that an increase in
susceptibility to heart disease (Chandola, Brunner, & Marmot, 2006) and
impaired function of the immune system (Glaser & Kiecolt-Glaser, 2005)
are among the many negative consequences of persistent and repeated
exposure to stressful situations.

Once the threat has been resolved, the parasympathetic nervous system
takes over and returns bodily functions to a relaxed state. Our hunter’s
heart rate and blood pressure return to normal, his pupils constrict, he
regains control of his bladder, and the liver begins to store glucose in
the form of glycogen for future use. These processes are associated with
activation of the parasympathetic nervous system.

Summary
=======

The brain and spinal cord make up the central nervous system. The
peripheral nervous system is comprised of the somatic and autonomic
nervous systems. The somatic nervous system transmits sensory and motor
signals to and from the central nervous system. The autonomic nervous
system controls the function of our organs and glands, and can be
divided into the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions. Sympathetic
activation prepares us for fight or flight, while parasympathetic
activation is associated with normal functioning under relaxed
conditions.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Our ability to make our legs move as we walk across the room is
      controlled by the \_______\_ nervous system.

      1. autonomic
      2. somatic
      3. sympathetic
      4. parasympathetic {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      If your \_______\_ is activated, you will feel relatively at ease.

      1. somatic nervous system
      2. sympathetic nervous system
      3. parasympathetic nervous system
      4. spinal cord {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      The central nervous system is comprised of \________.

      1. sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems
      2. organs and glands
      3. somatic and autonomic nervous systems
      4. brain and spinal cord {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      Sympathetic activation is associated with \________.

      1. pupil dilation
      2. storage of glucose in the liver
      3. increased heart rate
      4. both A and C {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      What are the implications of compromised immune function as a
      result of exposure to chronic stress?

   .. container::

      Chronic stress can lead to increased susceptibility to bacterial
      and viral infections, and potentially an increased risk of cancer.
      Ultimately, this could be a vicious cycle with stress leading to
      increased risk of disease, disease states leading to increased
      stress and so on.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Examine `[link] <#CNX_Psych_03_03_Autonomic>`__, illustrating the
      effects of sympathetic nervous system activation. How would all of
      these things play into the fight or flight response?

   .. container::

      Most of these effects directly impact energy availability and
      redistribution of key resources and heightened sensory capacity.
      The individual experiencing these effects would be better prepared
      to fight or flee.

Personal Application Questions
==============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Hopefully, you do not face real physical threats from potential
      predators on a daily basis. However, you probably have your fair
      share of stress. What situations are your most common sources of
      stress? What can you do to try to minimize the negative
      consequences of these particular stressors in your life?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   autonomic nervous system
      controls our internal organs and glands ^
   central nervous system (CNS)
      brain and spinal cord ^
   fight or flight response
      activation of the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous
      system, allowing access to energy reserves and heightened sensory
      capacity so that we might fight off a given threat or run away to
      safety ^
   homeostasis
      state of equilibrium—biological conditions, such as body
      temperature, are maintained at optimal levels ^
   parasympathetic nervous system
      associated with routine, day-to-day operations of the body ^
   peripheral nervous system (PNS)
      connects the brain and spinal cord to the muscles, organs and
      senses in the periphery of the body ^
   somatic nervous system
      relays sensory and motor information to and from the CNS ^
   sympathetic nervous system
      involved in stress-related activities and functions

.. |Image (a) shows an outline of a human body with the brain and spinal cord illustrated. Image (b) shows an outline of a human body with a network of nerves depicted.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_03_03_NervSystem.jpg
.. |A diagram of a human body lists the different functions of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system. The parasympathetic system can constrict pupils, stimulate salivation, slow heart rate, constrict bronchi, stimulate digestion, stimulate bile secretion, and cause the bladder to contract. The sympathetic nervous system can dilate pupils, inhibit salivation, increase heart rate, dilate bronchi, inhibit digestion, stimulate the breakdown of glycogen, stimulate secretion of adrenaline and noradrenaline, and inhibit contraction of the bladder.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_03_03_Autonomic.jpg
