==========================
The Source of Intelligence
==========================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Describe how
   genetics and environment affect intelligence \* Explain the
   relationship between IQ scores and socioeconomic status \* Describe
   the difference between a learning disability and a developmental
   disorder

A young girl, born of teenage parents, lives with her grandmother in
rural Mississippi. They are poor—in serious poverty—but they do their
best to get by with what they have. She learns to read when she is just
3 years old. As she grows older, she longs to live with her mother, who
now resides in Wisconsin. She moves there at the age of 6 years. At 9
years of age, she is raped. During the next several years, several
different male relatives repeatedly molest her. Her life unravels. She
turns to drugs and sex to fill the deep, lonely void inside her. Her
mother then sends her to Nashville to live with her father, who imposes
strict behavioral expectations upon her, and over time, her wild life
settles once again. She begins to experience success in school, and at
19 years old, becomes the youngest and first African-American female
news anchor (“Dates and Events,” n.d.). The woman—Oprah Winfrey—goes on
to become a media giant known for both her intelligence and her empathy.

HIGH INTELLIGENCE: NATURE OR NURTURE?
=====================================

Where does high intelligence come from? Some researchers believe that
intelligence is a trait inherited from a person’s parents. Scientists
who research this topic typically use twin studies to determine the
**heritability**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} of intelligence. The
Minnesota Study of Twins Reared Apart is one of the most well-known twin
studies. In this investigation, researchers found that identical twins
raised together and identical twins raised apart exhibit a higher
correlation between their IQ scores than siblings or fraternal twins
raised together (Bouchard, Lykken, McGue, Segal, & Tellegen, 1990). The
findings from this study reveal a genetic component to intelligence
(`[link] <#Figure_07_06_Correlations>`__). At the same time, other
psychologists believe that intelligence is shaped by a child’s
developmental environment. If parents were to provide their children
with intellectual stimuli from before they are born, it is likely that
they would absorb the benefits of that stimulation, and it would be
reflected in intelligence levels.

|A chart shows correlations of IQs for people of varying relationships.
The bottom is labeled “Percent IQ Correlation” and the left side is
labeled “Relationship.” The percent IQ Correlation for relationships
where no genes are shared, including adoptive parent-child pairs,
similarly aged unrelated children raised together, and adoptive siblings
are around 21 percent, 30 percent, and 32 percent, respectively. The
percent IQ Correlation for relationships where 25 percent of genes are
shared, as in half-siblings, is around 33 percent. The percent IQ
Correlation for relationships where 50 percent of genes are shared,
including parent-children pairs, and fraternal twins raised together,
are roughly 44 percent and 62 percent, respectively. A relationship
where 100 percent of genes are shared, as in identical twins raised
apart, results in a nearly 80 percent IQ correlation.|\ {:
#Figure_07_06_Correlations}

The reality is that aspects of each idea are probably correct. In fact,
one study suggests that although genetics seem to be in control of the
level of intelligence, the environmental influences provide both
stability and change to trigger manifestation of cognitive abilities
(Bartels, Rietveld, Van Baal, & Boomsma, 2002). Certainly, there are
behaviors that support the development of intelligence, but the genetic
component of high intelligence should not be ignored. As with all
heritable traits, however, it is not always possible to isolate how and
when high intelligence is passed on to the next generation.

**Range of Reaction**\ {: data-type=“term”} is the theory that each
person responds to the environment in a unique way based on his or her
genetic makeup. According to this idea, your genetic potential is a
fixed quantity, but whether you reach your full intellectual potential
is dependent upon the environmental stimulation you experience,
especially in childhood. Think about this scenario: A couple adopts a
child who has average genetic intellectual potential. They raise her in
an extremely stimulating environment. What will happen to the couple’s
new daughter? It is likely that the stimulating environment will improve
her intellectual outcomes over the course of her life. But what happens
if this experiment is reversed? If a child with an extremely strong
genetic background is placed in an environment that does not stimulate
him: What happens? Interestingly, according to a longitudinal study of
highly gifted individuals, it was found that “the two extremes of
optimal and pathological experience are both represented
disproportionately in the backgrounds of creative individuals”; however,
those who experienced supportive family environments were more likely to
report being happy (Csikszentmihalyi & Csikszentmihalyi, 1993, p. 187).

Another challenge to determining origins of high intelligence is the
confounding nature of our human social structures. It is troubling to
note that some ethnic groups perform better on IQ tests than others—and
it is likely that the results do not have much to do with the quality of
each ethnic group’s intellect. The same is true for socioeconomic
status. Children who live in poverty experience more pervasive, daily
stress than children who do not worry about the basic needs of safety,
shelter, and food. These worries can negatively affect how the brain
functions and develops, causing a dip in IQ scores. Mark Kishiyama and
his colleagues determined that children living in poverty demonstrated
reduced prefrontal brain functioning comparable to children with damage
to the lateral prefrontal cortex (Kishyama, Boyce, Jimenez, Perry, &
Knight, 2009).

The debate around the foundations and influences on intelligence
exploded in 1969, when an educational psychologist named Arthur Jensen
published the article “How Much Can We Boost I.Q. and Achievement” in
the *Harvard Educational Review*. Jensen had administered IQ tests to
diverse groups of students, and his results led him to the conclusion
that IQ is determined by genetics. He also posited that intelligence was
made up of two types of abilities: Level I and Level II. In his theory,
Level I is responsible for rote memorization, whereas Level II is
responsible for conceptual and analytical abilities. According to his
findings, Level I remained consistent among the human race. Level II,
however, exhibited differences among ethnic groups (Modgil & Routledge,
1987). Jensen’s most controversial conclusion was that Level II
intelligence is prevalent among Asians, then Caucasians, then African
Americans. Robert Williams was among those who called out racial bias in
Jensen’s results (Williams, 1970).

Obviously, Jensen’s interpretation of his own data caused an intense
response in a nation that continued to grapple with the effects of
racism (Fox, 2012). However, Jensen’s ideas were not solitary or unique;
rather, they represented one of many examples of psychologists asserting
racial differences in IQ and cognitive ability. In fact, Rushton and
Jensen (2005) reviewed three decades worth of research on the
relationship between race and cognitive ability. Jensen’s belief in the
inherited nature of intelligence and the validity of the IQ test to be
the truest measure of intelligence are at the core of his conclusions.
If, however, you believe that intelligence is more than Levels I and II,
or that IQ tests do not control for socioeconomic and cultural
differences among people, then perhaps you can dismiss Jensen’s
conclusions as a single window that looks out on the complicated and
varied landscape of human intelligence.

In a related story, parents of African American students filed a case
against the State of California in 1979, because they believed that the
testing method used to identify students with learning disabilities was
culturally unfair as the tests were normed and standardized using white
children (*Larry P. v. Riles*). The testing method used by the state
disproportionately identified African American children as mentally
retarded. This resulted in many students being incorrectly classified as
“mentally retarded.” According to a summary of the case, *Larry P. v.
Riles*:

   In violation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the
   Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and the Education for All Handicapped
   Children Act of 1975, defendants have utilized standardized
   intelligence tests that are racially and culturally biased, have a
   discriminatory impact against black children, and have not been
   validated for the purpose of essentially permanent placements of
   black children into educationally dead-end, isolated, and
   stigmatizing classes for the so-called educable mentally retarded.
   Further, these federal laws have been violated by defendants' general
   use of placement mechanisms that, taken together, have not been
   validated and result in a large over-representation of black children
   in the special E.M.R. classes. (*Larry P. v. Riles*, par. 6)

..

   Once again, the limitations of intelligence testing were revealed.

WHAT ARE LEARNING DISABILITIES?
===============================

Learning disabilities are cognitive disorders that affect different
areas of cognition, particularly language or reading. It should be
pointed out that learning disabilities are not the same thing as
intellectual disabilities. Learning disabilities are considered specific
neurological impairments rather than global intellectual or
developmental disabilities. A person with a language disability has
difficulty understanding or using spoken language, whereas someone with
a reading disability, such as dyslexia, has difficulty processing what
he or she is reading.

Often, learning disabilities are not recognized until a child reaches
school age. One confounding aspect of learning disabilities is that they
often affect children with average to above-average intelligence. At the
same time, learning disabilities tend to exhibit comorbidity with other
disorders, like attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
Anywhere between 30–70% of individuals with diagnosed cases of ADHD also
have some sort of learning disability (Riccio, Gonzales, & Hynd, 1994).
Let’s take a look at two examples of common learning disabilities:
dysgraphia and dyslexia.

Dysgraphia
----------

Children with **dysgraphia**\ {: data-type=“term”} have a learning
disability that results in a struggle to write legibly. The physical
task of writing with a pen and paper is extremely challenging for the
person. These children often have extreme difficulty putting their
thoughts down on paper (Smits-Engelsman & Van Galen, 1997). This
difficulty is inconsistent with a person’s IQ. That is, based on the
child’s IQ and/or abilities in other areas, a child with dysgraphia
should be able to write, but can’t. Children with dysgraphia may also
have problems with spatial abilities.

Students with dysgraphia need academic accommodations to help them
succeed in school. These accommodations can provide students with
alternative assessment opportunities to demonstrate what they know
(Barton, 2003). For example, a student with dysgraphia might be
permitted to take an oral exam rather than a traditional
paper-and-pencil test. Treatment is usually provided by an occupational
therapist, although there is some question as to how effective such
treatment is (Zwicker, 2005).

Dyslexia
--------

Dyslexia is the most common learning disability in children. An
individual with **dyslexia**\ {: data-type=“term”} exhibits an inability
to correctly process letters. The neurological mechanism for sound
processing does not work properly in someone with dyslexia. As a result,
dyslexic children may not understand sound-letter correspondence. A
child with dyslexia may mix up letters within words and sentences—letter
reversals, such as those shown in `[link] <#Figure_07_06_Dyslexia>`__,
are a hallmark of this learning disability—or skip whole words while
reading. A dyslexic child may have difficulty spelling words correctly
while writing. Because of the disordered way that the brain processes
letters and sound, learning to read is a frustrating experience. Some
dyslexic individuals cope by memorizing the shapes of most words, but
they never actually learn to read (Berninger, 2008).

|Two columns and five rows all containing the word “teapot” are shown.
“Teapot” is written ten times with the letters jumbled, sometimes
appearing backwards and upside down.|\ {: #Figure_07_06_Dyslexia}

Summary
=======

Genetics and environment affect intelligence and the challenges of
certain learning disabilities. The intelligence levels of all
individuals seem to benefit from rich stimulation in their early
environments. Highly intelligent individuals, however, may have a
built-in resiliency that allows them to overcome difficult obstacles in
their upbringing. Learning disabilities can cause major challenges for
children who are learning to read and write. Unlike developmental
disabilities, learning disabilities are strictly neurological in nature
and are not related to intelligence levels. Students with dyslexia, for
example, may have extreme difficulty learning to read, but their
intelligence levels are typically average or above average.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Where does high intelligence come from?

      1. genetics
      2. environment
      3. both A and B
      4. neither A nor B {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      Arthur Jensen believed that \________.

      1. genetics was solely responsible for intelligence
      2. environment was solely responsible for intelligence
      3. intelligence level was determined by race
      4. IQ tests do not take socioeconomic status into account {:
         type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      What is a learning disability?

      1. a developmental disorder
      2. a neurological disorder
      3. an emotional disorder
      4. an intellectual disorder {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which of the following statements is true?

      1. Poverty always affects whether individuals are able to reach
         their full intellectual potential.
      2. An individual’s intelligence is determined solely by the
         intelligence levels of his siblings.
      3. The environment in which an individual is raised is the
         strongest predictor of her future intelligence
      4. There are many factors working together to influence an
         individual’s intelligence level. {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      What evidence exists for a genetic component to an individual’s
      IQ?

   .. container::

      Twin studies are one strong indication that IQ has a genetic
      component. Another indication is anecdotal evidence in the form of
      stories about highly intelligent individuals who come from
      difficult backgrounds yet still become highly successful adults.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Describe the relationship between learning disabilities and
      intellectual disabilities to intelligence.

   .. container::

      Learning disabilities are specific neurological problems within
      the brain and are separate from intelligence. Intellectual
      disabilities are pervasive and related to intelligence.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Do you believe your level of intelligence was improved because of
      the stimuli in your childhood environment? Why or why not?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   dysgraphia
      learning disability that causes extreme difficulty in writing
      legibly ^
   dyslexia
      common learning disability in which letters are not processed
      properly by the brain ^
   range of reaction
      each person’s response to the environment is unique based on his
      or her genetic make-up

.. |A chart shows correlations of IQs for people of varying relationships. The bottom is labeled “Percent IQ Correlation” and the left side is labeled “Relationship.” The percent IQ Correlation for relationships where no genes are shared, including adoptive parent-child pairs, similarly aged unrelated children raised together, and adoptive siblings are around 21 percent, 30 percent, and 32 percent, respectively. The percent IQ Correlation for relationships where 25 percent of genes are shared, as in half-siblings, is around 33 percent. The percent IQ Correlation for relationships where 50 percent of genes are shared, including parent-children pairs, and fraternal twins raised together, are roughly 44 percent and 62 percent, respectively. A relationship where 100 percent of genes are shared, as in identical twins raised apart, results in a nearly 80 percent IQ correlation.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_07_06_Correlations.jpg
.. |Two columns and five rows all containing the word “teapot” are shown. “Teapot” is written ten times with the letters jumbled, sometimes appearing backwards and upside down.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_07_06_Teapot.jpg
