===========================
Cells of the Nervous System
===========================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Identify the
   basic parts of a neuron \* Describe how neurons communicate with each
   other \* Explain how drugs act as agonists or antagonists for a given
   neurotransmitter system

Psychologists striving to understand the human mind may study the
nervous system. Learning how the cells and organs (like the brain)
function, help us understand the biological basis behind human
psychology. The **nervous system**\ {: data-type=“term”} is composed of
two basic cell types: glial cells (also known as glia) and neurons.
Glial cells, which outnumber neurons ten to one, are traditionally
thought to play a supportive role to neurons, both physically and
metabolically. **Glial cells**\ {: data-type=“term”} provide scaffolding
on which the nervous system is built, help neurons line up closely with
each other to allow neuronal communication, provide insulation to
neurons, transport nutrients and waste products, and mediate immune
responses. **Neurons**\ {: data-type=“term”}, on the other hand, serve
as interconnected information processors that are essential for all of
the tasks of the nervous system. This section briefly describes the
structure and function of neurons.

Neuron Structure
================

**Neurons**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} are the central building
blocks of the nervous system, 100 billion strong at birth. Like all
cells, neurons consist of several different parts, each serving a
specialized function (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_03_02_Neuron>`__). A neuron’s
outer surface is made up of a **semipermeable membrane**\ {:
data-type=“term”}. This membrane allows smaller molecules and molecules
without an electrical charge to pass through it, while stopping larger
or highly charged molecules.

|An illustration shows a neuron with labeled parts for the cell
membrane, dendrite, cell body, axon, and terminal buttons. A myelin
sheath covers part of the neuron.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_03_02_Neuron}

The nucleus of the neuron is located in the **soma**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, or cell body. The soma has branching extensions known
as **dendrites**\ {: data-type=“term”}. The neuron is a small
information processor, and dendrites serve as input sites where signals
are received from other neurons. These signals are transmitted
electrically across the soma and down a major extension from the soma
known as the **axon**\ {: data-type=“term”}, which ends at multiple
**terminal buttons**\ {: data-type=“term”}. The terminal buttons contain
**synaptic vesicles**\ {: data-type=“term”} that house
**neurotransmitters**\ {: data-type=“term”}, the chemical messengers of
the nervous system.

Axons range in length from a fraction of an inch to several feet. In
some axons, glial cells form a fatty substance known as the **myelin
sheath**\ {: data-type=“term”}, which coats the axon and acts as an
insulator, increasing the speed at which the signal travels. The myelin
sheath is crucial for the normal operation of the neurons within the
nervous system: the loss of the insulation it provides can be
detrimental to normal function. To understand how this works, let’s
consider an example. Multiple sclerosis (MS), an autoimmune disorder,
involves a large-scale loss of the myelin sheath on axons throughout the
nervous system. The resulting interference in the electrical signal
prevents the quick transmittal of information by neurons and can lead to
a number of symptoms, such as dizziness, fatigue, loss of motor control,
and sexual dysfunction. While some treatments may help to modify the
course of the disease and manage certain symptoms, there is currently no
known cure for multiple sclerosis.

In healthy individuals, the neuronal signal moves rapidly down the axon
to the terminal buttons, where synaptic vesicles release
neurotransmitters into the synapse
(`[link] <#CNX_Psych_03_02_Synapse>`__). The **synapse**\ {:
data-type=“term”} is a very small space between two neurons and is an
important site where communication between neurons occurs. Once
neurotransmitters are released into the synapse, they travel across the
small space and bind with corresponding receptors on the dendrite of an
adjacent neuron. **Receptors**\ {: data-type=“term”}, proteins on the
cell surface where neurotransmitters attach, vary in shape, with
different shapes “matching” different neurotransmitters.

How does a neurotransmitter “know” which receptor to bind to? The
neurotransmitter and the receptor have what is referred to as a
lock-and-key relationship—specific neurotransmitters fit specific
receptors similar to how a key fits a lock. The neurotransmitter binds
to any receptor that it fits.

|Image (a) shows the synaptic space between two neurons, with
neurotransmitters being released into the synapse and attaching to
receptors. Image (b) is a micrograph showing a spherical terminal button
with part of the exterior removed, revealing a solid interior of small
round parts.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_03_02_Synapse}

Neuronal Communication
======================

Now that we have learned about the basic structures of the neuron and
the role that these structures play in neuronal communication, let’s
take a closer look at the signal itself—how it moves through the neuron
and then jumps to the next neuron, where the process is repeated.

We begin at the neuronal membrane. The **neuron**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis} exists in a fluid environment—it is surrounded by
extracellular fluid and contains intracellular fluid (i.e., cytoplasm).
The neuronal membrane keeps these two fluids separate—a critical role
because the electrical signal that passes through the neuron depends on
the intra- and extracellular fluids being electrically different. This
difference in charge across the membrane, called the **membrane
potential**\ {: data-type=“term”}, provides energy for the signal.

The electrical charge of the fluids is caused by charged molecules
(ions) dissolved in the fluid. The semipermeable nature of the neuronal
membrane somewhat restricts the movement of these charged molecules,
and, as a result, some of the charged particles tend to become more
concentrated either inside or outside the cell.

Between signals, the neuron membrane’s potential is held in a state of
readiness, called the **resting potential**\ {: data-type=“term”}. Like
a rubber band stretched out and waiting to spring into action, ions line
up on either side of the cell membrane, ready to rush across the
membrane when the neuron goes active and the membrane opens its gates
(i.e., a **sodium-potassium pump**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}
that allows movement of ions across the membrane). Ions in
high-concentration areas are ready to move to low-concentration areas,
and positive ions are ready to move to areas with a negative charge.

In the resting state, sodium (Na+) is at higher concentrations outside
the cell, so it will tend to move into the cell. Potassium (K+), on the
other hand, is more concentrated inside the cell, and will tend to move
out of the cell (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_03_02_NaKConc>`__). In addition,
the inside of the cell is slightly negatively charged compared to the
outside. This provides an additional force on sodium, causing it to move
into the cell.

|A close-up illustration depicts the difference in charges across the
cell membrane, and shows how Na+ and K+ cells concentrate more closely
near the membrane.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_03_02_NaKConc}

From this resting potential state, the neuron receives a signal and its
state changes abruptly (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_03_02_ActionP>`__). When a
neuron receives signals at the dendrites—due to neurotransmitters from
an adjacent neuron binding to its receptors—small pores, or gates, open
on the neuronal membrane, allowing Na+ ions, propelled by both charge
and concentration differences, to move into the cell. With this influx
of positive ions, the internal charge of the cell becomes more positive.
If that charge reaches a certain level, called the **threshold of
excitation**\ {: data-type=“term”}, the neuron becomes active and the
action potential begins.

Many additional pores open, causing a massive influx of Na+ ions and a
huge positive spike in the membrane potential, the peak action
potential. At the peak of the spike, the sodium gates close and the
potassium gates open. As positively charged potassium ions leave, the
cell quickly begins repolarization. At first, it hyperpolarizes,
becoming slightly more negative than the resting potential, and then it
levels off, returning to the resting potential.

|A graph shows the increase, peak, and decrease in membrane potential.
The millivolts through the phases are approximately -70mV at resting
potential, -55mV at threshold of excitation, 30mV at peak action
potential, 5mV at repolarization, and -80mV at hyperpolarization.|\ {:
#CNX_Psych_03_02_ActionP}

This positive spike constitutes the **action potential**\ {:
data-type=“term”}: the electrical signal that typically moves from the
cell body down the axon to the axon terminals. The electrical signal
moves down the axon like a wave; at each point, some of the sodium ions
that enter the cell diffuse to the next section of the axon, raising the
charge past the threshold of excitation and triggering a new influx of
sodium ions. The action potential moves all the way down the axon to the
terminal buttons.

The action potential is an **all-or-none**\ {: data-type=“term”}
phenomenon. In simple terms, this means that an incoming signal from
another neuron is either sufficient or insufficient to reach the
threshold of excitation. There is no in-between, and there is no turning
off an action potential once it starts. Think of it like sending an
email or a text message. You can think about sending it all you want,
but the message is not sent until you hit the send button. Furthermore,
once you send the message, there is no stopping it.

Because it is all or none, the **action potential**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis} is recreated, or propagated, at its full strength at every
point along the axon. Much like the lit fuse of a firecracker, it does
not fade away as it travels down the axon. It is this all-or-none
property that explains the fact that your brain perceives an injury to a
distant body part like your toe as equally painful as one to your nose.

As noted earlier, when the action potential arrives at the terminal
button, the synaptic vesicles release their neurotransmitters into the
synapse. The neurotransmitters travel across the synapse and bind to
receptors on the dendrites of the adjacent neuron, and the process
repeats itself in the new neuron (assuming the signal is sufficiently
strong to trigger an action potential). Once the signal is delivered,
excess neurotransmitters in the synapse drift away, are broken down into
inactive fragments, or are reabsorbed in a process known as
**reuptake**\ {: data-type=“term”}. Reuptake involves the
neurotransmitter being pumped back into the neuron that released it, in
order to clear the synapse (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_03_02_Reuptake>`__).
Clearing the synapse serves both to provide a clear “on” and “off” state
between signals and to regulate the production of neurotransmitter (full
synaptic vesicles provide signals that no additional neurotransmitters
need to be produced).

|The synaptic space between two neurons is shown. Some neurotransmitters
that have been released into the synapse are attaching to receptors
while others undergo reuptake into the axon terminal.|\ {:
#CNX_Psych_03_02_Reuptake}

Neuronal communication is often referred to as an electrochemical event.
The movement of the action potential down the length of the axon is an
electrical event, and movement of the neurotransmitter across the
synaptic space represents the chemical portion of the process.

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Click through this `interactive
   simulation <http://openstax.org/l/chospital>`__ for a closer look at
   neuronal communication.

Neurotransmitters and Drugs
===========================

There are several different types of **neurotransmitters**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} released by different neurons, and we can
speak in broad terms about the kinds of functions associated with
different neurotransmitters (`[link] <#fs-id1346979>`__). Much of what
psychologists know about the functions of neurotransmitters comes from
research on the effects of drugs in psychological disorders.
Psychologists who take a **biological perspective**\ {:
data-type=“term”} and focus on the physiological causes of behavior
assert that psychological disorders like depression and schizophrenia
are associated with imbalances in one or more neurotransmitter systems.
In this perspective, psychotropic medications can help improve the
symptoms associated with these disorders. **Psychotropic
medications**\ {: data-type=“term”} are drugs that treat psychiatric
symptoms by restoring neurotransmitter balance.

.. raw:: html

   <table summary="A table with 3 columns and 8 rows lists major neurotransmitters, the body functions they are involved in, and their potential effect on behavior. Acetylcholine is involved in muscle action and memory; it can increase arousal and enhance cognition. Beta-endorphin is involved in pain and pleasure; it can decrease anxiety and tension. Dopamine is involved in mood, sleep, and learning; it can increase pleasure and suppress appetite. Gamma-aminobutyric acid is involved in brain function and sleep; it can decrease anxiety and tension. Glutamate is involved in memory and learning; it can increase learning and enhance memory. Norepinephrine is involved in heart and intestinal function and alertness; it can increase arousal and suppress appetite. Serotonin is involved in mood and sleep; it can modulate mood and suppress appetite.">

.. raw:: html

   <caption>

Major Neurotransmitters and How They Affect Behavior

.. raw:: html

   </caption>

.. raw:: html

   <thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Neurotransmitter

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Involved in

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Potential Effect on Behavior

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tbody>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Acetylcholine

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Muscle action, memory

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Increased arousal, enhanced cognition

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Beta-endorphin

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Pain, pleasure

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Decreased anxiety, decreased tension

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Dopamine

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Mood, sleep, learning

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Increased pleasure, suppressed appetite

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Brain function, sleep

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Decreased anxiety, decreased tension

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Glutamate

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Memory, learning

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Increased learning, enhanced memory

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Norepinephrine

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Heart, intestines, alertness

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Increased arousal, suppressed appetite

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Serotonin

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Mood, sleep

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Modulated mood, suppressed appetite

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </tbody>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

Psychoactive drugs can act as agonists or antagonists for a given
neurotransmitter system. **Agonists**\ {: data-type=“term”} are
chemicals that mimic a neurotransmitter at the receptor site and, thus,
strengthen its effects. An **antagonist**\ {: data-type=“term”}, on the
other hand, blocks or impedes the normal activity of a neurotransmitter
at the receptor. Agonist and antagonist drugs are prescribed to correct
the specific neurotransmitter imbalances underlying a person’s
condition. For example, Parkinson's disease, a progressive nervous
system disorder, is associated with low levels of dopamine. Therefore
dopamine agonists, which mimic the effects of dopamine by binding to
dopamine receptors, are one treatment strategy.

Certain symptoms of schizophrenia are associated with overactive
dopamine neurotransmission. The antipsychotics used to treat these
symptoms are antagonists for dopamine—they block dopamine’s effects by
binding its receptors without activating them. Thus, they prevent
dopamine released by one neuron from signaling information to adjacent
neurons.

In contrast to agonists and antagonists, which both operate by binding
to receptor sites, reuptake inhibitors prevent unused neurotransmitters
from being transported back to the neuron. This leaves more
neurotransmitters in the synapse for a longer time, increasing its
effects. Depression, which has been consistently linked with reduced
serotonin levels, is commonly treated with selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs). By preventing reuptake, SSRIs strengthen the effect
of serotonin, giving it more time to interact with serotonin receptors
on dendrites. Common SSRIs on the market today include Prozac, Paxil,
and Zoloft. The drug LSD is structurally very similar to serotonin, and
it affects the same neurons and receptors as serotonin. Psychotropic
drugs are not instant solutions for people suffering from psychological
disorders. Often, an individual must take a drug for several weeks
before seeing improvement, and many psychoactive drugs have significant
negative side effects. Furthermore, individuals vary dramatically in how
they respond to the drugs. To improve chances for success, it is not
uncommon for people receiving pharmacotherapy to undergo psychological
and/or behavioral therapies as well. Some research suggests that
combining drug therapy with other forms of therapy tends to be more
effective than any one treatment alone (for one such example, see March
et al., 2007).

Summary
=======

Glia and neurons are the two cell types that make up the nervous system.
While glia generally play supporting roles, the communication between
neurons is fundamental to all of the functions associated with the
nervous system. Neuronal communication is made possible by the neuron’s
specialized structures. The soma contains the cell nucleus, and the
dendrites extend from the soma in tree-like branches. The axon is
another major extension of the cell body; axons are often covered by a
myelin sheath, which increases the speed of transmission of neural
impulses. At the end of the axon are terminal buttons that contain
synaptic vesicles filled with neurotransmitters.

Neuronal communication is an electrochemical event. The dendrites
contain receptors for neurotransmitters released by nearby neurons. If
the signals received from other neurons are sufficiently strong, an
action potential will travel down the length of the axon to the terminal
buttons, resulting in the release of neurotransmitters into the synapse.
Action potentials operate on the all-or-none principle and involve the
movement of Na+ and K+ across the neuronal membrane.

Different neurotransmitters are associated with different functions.
Often, psychological disorders involve imbalances in a given
neurotransmitter system. Therefore, psychotropic drugs are prescribed in
an attempt to bring the neurotransmitters back into balance. Drugs can
act either as agonists or as antagonists for a given neurotransmitter
system.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      The \_______\_ receive(s) incoming signals from other neurons.

      1. soma
      2. terminal buttons
      3. myelin sheath
      4. dendrites {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      A(n) \_______\_ facilitates or mimics the activity of a given
      neurotransmitter system.

      1. axon
      2. SSRI
      3. agonist
      4. antagonist {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      Multiple sclerosis involves a breakdown of the \________.

      1. soma
      2. myelin sheath
      3. synaptic vesicles
      4. dendrites {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      An action potential involves Na+ moving \_______\_ the cell and K+
      moving \_______\_ the cell.

      1. inside; outside
      2. outside; inside
      3. inside; inside
      4. outside; outside {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Cocaine has two effects on synaptic transmission: it impairs
      reuptake of dopamine and it causes more dopamine to be released
      into the synapse. Would cocaine be classified as an agonist or
      antagonist? Why?

   .. container::

      As a reuptake inhibitor, cocaine blocks the normal activity of
      dopamine at the receptor. The function causing more dopamine to be
      released into the synapse is agonist because it mimics and
      strengthens the effect of the neurotransmitter. Cocaine would be
      considered an agonist because by preventing the enzymatic
      degradation of the neurotransmitters, it increases the potential
      time that these neurotransmitters might be active in the synapse.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Drugs such as lidocaine and novocaine act as Na+ channel blockers.
      In other words, they prevent sodium from moving across the
      neuronal membrane. Why would this particular effect make these
      drugs such effective local anesthetics?

   .. container::

      The action potential is initiated by an influx of Na+ into the
      neuron. If this process is prevented, then no action potentials in
      neurons in a given area will occur. Therefore, any painful stimuli
      would not result in action potentials carrying that information to
      the brain.

Personal Application Queation
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Have you or someone you know ever been prescribed a psychotropic
      medication? If so, what side effects were associated with the
      treatment?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   action potential
      electrical signal that moves down the neuron’s axon ^
   agonist
      drug that mimics or strengthens the effects of a neurotransmitter
      ^
   all-or-none
      phenomenon that incoming signal from another neuron is either
      sufficient or insufficient to reach the threshold of excitation ^
   antagonist
      drug that blocks or impedes the normal activity of a given
      neurotransmitter ^
   axon
      major extension of the soma ^
   biological perspective
      view that psychological disorders like depression and
      schizophrenia are associated with imbalances in one or more
      neurotransmitter systems ^
   dendrite
      branch-like extension of the soma that receives incoming signals
      from other neurons ^
   glial cell
      nervous system cell that provides physical and metabolic support
      to neurons, including neuronal insulation and communication, and
      nutrient and waste transport ^
   membrane potential
      difference in charge across the neuronal membrane ^
   myelin sheath
      fatty substance that insulates axons ^
   neuron
      cells in the nervous system that act as interconnected information
      processors, which are essential for all of the tasks of the
      nervous system ^
   neurotransmitter
      chemical messenger of the nervous system ^
   psychotropic medication
      drugs that treat psychiatric symptoms by restoring
      neurotransmitter balance ^
   receptor
      protein on the cell surface where neurotransmitters attach ^
   resting potential
      the state of readiness of a neuron membrane’s potential between
      signals ^
   reuptake
      neurotransmitter is pumped back into the neuron that released it ^
   semipermeable membrane
      cell membrane that allows smaller molecules or molecules without
      an electrical charge to pass through it, while stopping larger or
      highly charged molecules ^
   soma
      cell body ^
   synapse
      small gap between two neurons where communication occurs ^
   synaptic vesicle
      storage site for neurotransmitters ^
   terminal button
      axon terminal containing synaptic vesicles ^
   threshold of excitation
      level of charge in the membrane that causes the neuron to become
      active

.. |An illustration shows a neuron with labeled parts for the cell membrane, dendrite, cell body, axon, and terminal buttons. A myelin sheath covers part of the neuron.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_03_02_Neuron_n.jpg
.. |Image (a) shows the synaptic space between two neurons, with neurotransmitters being released into the synapse and attaching to receptors. Image (b) is a micrograph showing a spherical terminal button with part of the exterior removed, revealing a solid interior of small round parts.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_03_02_Synapse.jpg
.. |A close-up illustration depicts the difference in charges across the cell membrane, and shows how Na+ and K+ cells concentrate more closely near the membrane.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_03_02_NaKConc.jpg
.. |A graph shows the increase, peak, and decrease in membrane potential. The millivolts through the phases are approximately -70mV at resting potential, -55mV at threshold of excitation, 30mV at peak action potential, 5mV at repolarization, and -80mV at hyperpolarization.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_03_02_ActionPn.jpg
.. |The synaptic space between two neurons is shown. Some neurotransmitters that have been released into the synapse are attaching to receptors while others undergo reuptake into the axon terminal.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_03_02_Reuptake.jpg
