====================
The Endocrine System
====================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Identify the
   major glands of the endocrine system \* Identify the hormones
   secreted by each gland \* Describe each hormone’s role in regulating
   bodily functions

The **endocrine system**\ {: data-type=“term”} consists of a series of
glands that produce chemical substances known as **hormones**\ {:
data-type=“term”} (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_03_05_Endocrine>`__). Like
neurotransmitters, hormones are chemical messengers that must bind to a
receptor in order to send their signal. However, unlike
neurotransmitters, which are released in close proximity to cells with
their receptors, hormones are secreted into the bloodstream and travel
throughout the body, affecting any cells that contain receptors for
them. Thus, whereas neurotransmitters’ effects are localized, the
effects of hormones are widespread. Also, hormones are slower to take
effect, and tend to be longer lasting.

|A diagram of the human body illustrates the locations of the thymus,
several parts within the brain (pineal gland, hypothalamus, thalamus,
pituitary gland), several parts within the thyroid (cartilage, thyroid
gland, parathyroid glands, trachea), the adrenal glands, pancreas,
uterus, ovaries, and testes.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_03_05_Endocrine}

Hormones are involved in regulating all sorts of bodily functions, and
they are ultimately controlled through interactions between the
hypothalamus (in the central nervous system) and the pituitary gland (in
the endocrine system). Imbalances in hormones are related to a number of
disorders. This section explores some of the major glands that make up
the endocrine system and the hormones secreted by these glands.

Major Glands
============

The **pituitary gland**\ {: data-type=“term”} descends from the
hypothalamus at the base of the brain, and acts in close association
with it. The pituitary is often referred to as the “master gland”
because its messenger hormones control all the other glands in the
endocrine system, although it mostly carries out instructions from the
hypothalamus. In addition to messenger hormones, the pituitary also
secretes growth hormone, endorphins for pain relief, and a number of key
hormones that regulate fluid levels in the body.

Located in the neck, the **thyroid gland**\ {: data-type=“term”}
releases hormones that regulate growth, metabolism, and appetite. In
hyperthyroidism, or Grave’s disease, the thyroid secretes too much of
the hormone thyroxine, causing agitation, bulging eyes, and weight loss.
In hypothyroidism, reduced hormone levels cause sufferers to experience
tiredness, and they often complain of feeling cold. Fortunately, thyroid
disorders are often treatable with medications that help reestablish a
balance in the hormones secreted by the thyroid.

The **adrenal glands**\ {: data-type=“term”} sit atop our kidneys and
secrete hormones involved in the stress response, such as epinephrine
(adrenaline) and norepinephrine (noradrenaline). The **pancreas**\ {:
data-type=“term”} is an internal organ that secretes hormones that
regulate blood sugar levels: insulin and glucagon. These pancreatic
hormones are essential for maintaining stable levels of blood sugar
throughout the day by lowering blood glucose levels (insulin) or raising
them (glucagon). People who suffer from **diabetes**\ {:
data-type=“term”} do not produce enough insulin; therefore, they must
take medications that stimulate or replace insulin production, and they
must closely control the amount of sugars and carbohydrates they
consume.

The **gonads**\ {: data-type=“term”} secrete sexual hormones, which are
important in reproduction, and mediate both sexual motivation and
behavior. The female gonads are the ovaries; the male gonads are the
testes. Ovaries secrete estrogens and progesterone, and the testes
secrete androgens, such as testosterone.

.. container:: psychology dig-deeper

   .. container::

      Athletes and Anabolic Steroids

   Although it is against Federal laws and many professional athletic
   associations (The National Football League, for example) have banned
   their use, anabolic steroid drugs continue to be used by amateur and
   professional athletes. The drugs are believed to enhance athletic
   performance. Anabolic steroid drugs mimic the effects of the body’s
   own steroid hormones, like testosterone and its derivatives. These
   drugs have the potential to provide a competitive edge by increasing
   muscle mass, strength, and endurance, although not all users may
   experience these results. Moreover, use of performance-enhancing
   drugs (PEDs) does not come without risks. Anabolic steroid use has
   been linked with a wide variety of potentially negative outcomes,
   ranging in severity from largely cosmetic (acne) to life threatening
   (heart attack). Furthermore, use of these substances can result in
   profound changes in mood and can increase aggressive behavior
   (National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2001).

   Baseball player Alex Rodriguez (A-Rod) has been at the center of a
   media storm regarding his use of illegal PEDs. Rodriguez’s
   performance on the field was unparalleled while using the drugs; his
   success played a large role in negotiating a contract that made him
   the highest paid player in professional baseball. Although Rodriguez
   maintains that he has not used PEDs for the several years, he
   received a substantial suspension in 2013 that, if upheld, will cost
   him more than 20 million dollars in earnings (Gaines, 2013). What are
   your thoughts on athletes and doping? Why or why not should the use
   of PEDs be banned? What advice would you give an athlete who was
   considering using PEDs?

Summary
=======

The glands of the endocrine system secrete hormones to regulate normal
body functions. The hypothalamus serves as the interface between the
nervous system and the endocrine system, and it controls the secretions
of the pituitary. The pituitary serves as the master gland, controlling
the secretions of all other glands. The thyroid secretes thyroxine,
which is important for basic metabolic processes and growth; the adrenal
glands secrete hormones involved in the stress response; the pancreas
secretes hormones that regulate blood sugar levels; and the ovaries and
testes produce sex hormones that regulate sexual motivation and
behavior.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      The two major hormones secreted from the pancreas are:

      1. estrogen and progesterone
      2. norepinephrine and epinephrine
      3. thyroxine and oxytocin
      4. glucagon and insulin {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      The \_______\_ secretes messenger hormones that direct the
      function of the rest of the endocrine glands.

      1. ovary
      2. thyroid
      3. pituitary
      4. pancreas {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      The \_______\_ gland secretes epinephrine.

      1. adrenal
      2. thyroid
      3. pituitary
      4. master {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      The \_______\_ secretes hormones that regulate the body’s fluid
      levels.

      1. adrenal
      2. pituitary
      3. testes
      4. thyroid {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Hormone secretion is often regulated through a negative feedback
      mechanism, which means that once a hormone is secreted it will
      cause the hypothalamus and pituitary to shut down the production
      of signals necessary to secrete the hormone in the first place.
      Most oral contraceptives are made of small doses of estrogen
      and/or progesterone. Why would this be an effective means of
      contraception?

   .. container::

      The introduction of relatively low, yet constant, levels of
      gonadal hormones places the hypothalamus and pituitary under
      inhibition via negative feedback mechanisms. This prevents the
      alterations in both estrogen and progesterone concentrations that
      are necessary for successful ovulation and implantation.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Chemical messengers are used in both the nervous system and the
      endocrine system. What properties do these two systems share? What
      properties are different? Which one would be faster? Which one
      would result in long-lasting changes?

   .. container::

      Both systems involve chemical messengers that must interact with
      receptors in order to have an effect. The relative proximity of
      the release site and target tissue varies dramatically between the
      two systems. In neurotransmission, reuptake and enzymatic
      breakdown immediately clear the synapse. Metabolism of hormones
      must occur in the liver. Therefore, while neurotransmission is
      much more rapid in signaling information, hormonal signaling can
      persist for quite some time as the concentrations of the hormone
      in the bloodstream vary gradually over time.

Personal Application Questions
==============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Given the negative health consequences associated with the use of
      anabolic steroids, what kinds of considerations might be involved
      in a person’s decision to use them?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   adrenal gland
      sits atop our kidneys and secretes hormones involved in the stress
      response ^
   diabetes
      disease related to insufficient insulin production ^
   endocrine system
      series of glands that produce chemical substances known as
      hormones ^
   gonad
      secretes sexual hormones, which are important for successful
      reproduction, and mediate both sexual motivation and behavior ^
   hormone
      chemical messenger released by endocrine glands ^
   pancreas
      secretes hormones that regulate blood sugar ^
   pituitary gland
      secretes a number of key hormones, which regulate fluid levels in
      the body, and a number of messenger hormones, which direct the
      activity of other glands in the endocrine system ^
   thyroid
      secretes hormones that regulate growth, metabolism, and appetite

.. |A diagram of the human body illustrates the locations of the thymus, several parts within the brain (pineal gland, hypothalamus, thalamus, pituitary gland), several parts within the thyroid (cartilage, thyroid gland, parathyroid glands, trachea), the adrenal glands, pancreas, uterus, ovaries, and testes.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_03_05_Endocrine.jpg
