================
The Other Senses
================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Describe the
   basic functions of the chemical senses \* Explain the basic functions
   of the somatosensory, nociceptive, and thermoceptive sensory systems
   \* Describe the basic functions of the vestibular, proprioceptive,
   and kinesthetic sensory systems

Vision and hearing have received an incredible amount of attention from
researchers over the years. While there is still much to be learned
about how these sensory systems work, we have a much better
understanding of them than of our other sensory modalities. In this
section, we will explore our chemical senses (taste and smell) and our
body senses (touch, temperature, pain, balance, and body position).

THE CHEMICAL SENSES
===================

Taste (gustation) and **smell**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}
(olfaction) are called chemical senses because both have sensory
receptors that respond to molecules in the food we eat or in the air we
breathe. There is a pronounced interaction between our chemical senses.
For example, when we describe the flavor of a given food, we are really
referring to both gustatory and olfactory properties of the food working
in combination.

Taste (Gustation)
-----------------

You have learned since elementary school that there are four basic
groupings of taste: sweet, salty, sour, and bitter. Research
demonstrates, however, that we have at least six **taste**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} groupings. Umami is our fifth taste.
**Umami**\ {: data-type=“term”} is actually a Japanese word that roughly
translates to yummy, and it is associated with a taste for monosodium
glutamate (Kinnamon & Vandenbeuch, 2009). There is also a growing body
of experimental evidence suggesting that we possess a taste for the
fatty content of a given food (Mizushige, Inoue, & Fushiki, 2007).

Molecules from the food and beverages we consume dissolve in our saliva
and interact with taste receptors on our tongue and in our mouth and
throat. **Taste buds**\ {: data-type=“term”} are formed by groupings of
taste receptor cells with hair-like extensions that protrude into the
central pore of the taste bud (`[link] <#Figure_05_05_TasteBud>`__).
Taste buds have a life cycle of ten days to two weeks, so even
destroying some by burning your tongue won’t have any long-term effect;
they just grow right back. Taste molecules bind to receptors on this
extension and cause chemical changes within the sensory cell that result
in neural impulses being transmitted to the brain via different nerves,
depending on where the receptor is located. Taste information is
transmitted to the medulla, thalamus, and limbic system, and to the
gustatory cortex, which is tucked underneath the overlap between the
frontal and temporal lobes (Maffei, Haley, & Fontanini, 2012; Roper,
2013).

|Illustration A shows a taste bud in an opening of the tongue, with the
“tongue surface,” “taste pore,” “taste receptor cell” and “nerves”
labeled. Part B is a micrograph showing taste buds on a human
tongue.|\ {: #Figure_05_05_TasteBud}

Smell (Olfaction)
-----------------

**Olfactory receptor**\ {: data-type=“term”} cells are located in a
mucous membrane at the top of the nose. Small hair-like extensions from
these receptors serve as the sites for odor molecules dissolved in the
mucus to interact with chemical receptors located on these extensions
(`[link] <#Figure_05_05_OlfacRecep>`__). Once an odor molecule has bound
a given receptor, chemical changes within the cell result in signals
being sent to the **olfactory bulb**\ {: data-type=“term”}: a bulb-like
structure at the tip of the frontal lobe where the olfactory nerves
begin. From the olfactory bulb, information is sent to regions of the
limbic system and to the primary olfactory cortex, which is located very
near the gustatory cortex (Lodovichi & Belluscio, 2012; Spors et al.,
2013).

|An illustration shows a side view of a human head and the location of
the “nasal cavity,” “olfactory receptors,” and “olfactory bulb.”|\ {:
#Figure_05_05_OlfacRecep}

There is tremendous variation in the sensitivity of the olfactory
systems of different species. We often think of dogs as having far
superior olfactory systems than our own, and indeed, dogs can do some
remarkable things with their noses. There is some evidence to suggest
that dogs can “smell” dangerous drops in blood glucose levels as well as
cancerous tumors (Wells, 2010). Dogs’ extraordinary olfactory abilities
may be due to the increased number of functional genes for olfactory
receptors (between 800 and 1200), compared to the fewer than 400
observed in humans and other primates (Niimura & Nei, 2007).

Many species respond to chemical messages, known as **pheromones**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, sent by another individual (Wysocki & Preti, 2004).
Pheromonal communication often involves providing information about the
reproductive status of a potential mate. So, for example, when a female
rat is ready to mate, she secretes pheromonal signals that draw
attention from nearby male rats. Pheromonal activation is actually an
important component in eliciting sexual behavior in the male rat
(Furlow, 1996, 2012; Purvis & Haynes, 1972; Sachs, 1997). There has also
been a good deal of research (and controversy) about pheromones in
humans (Comfort, 1971; Russell, 1976; Wolfgang-Kimball, 1992; Weller,
1998).

TOUCH, THERMOCEPTION, AND NOCICEPTION
=====================================

A number of receptors are distributed throughout the skin to respond to
various touch-related stimuli (`[link] <#Figure_05_05_Touch>`__). These
receptors include Meissner’s corpuscles, Pacinian corpuscles, Merkel’s
disks, and Ruffini corpuscles. **Meissner’s corpuscles**\ {:
data-type=“term”} respond to pressure and lower frequency vibrations,
and **Pacinian corpuscles**\ {: data-type=“term”} detect transient
pressure and higher frequency vibrations. **Merkel’s disks**\ {:
data-type=“term”} respond to light pressure, while **Ruffini
corpuscles**\ {: data-type=“term”} detect stretch (Abraira & Ginty,
2013).

|An illustration shows “skin surface” underneath which different
receptors are identified: the “pacinian corpuscle,” “ruffini corpuscle,”
“merkel’s disk,” and “meissner’s corpuscle.”|\ {: #Figure_05_05_Touch}

In addition to the receptors located in the skin, there are also a
number of free nerve endings that serve sensory functions. These nerve
endings respond to a variety of different types of touch-related stimuli
and serve as sensory receptors for both **thermoception**\ {:
data-type=“term”} (temperature perception) and **nociception**\ {:
data-type=“term”} (a signal indicating potential harm and maybe pain)
(Garland, 2012; Petho & Reeh, 2012; Spray, 1986). Sensory information
collected from the receptors and free nerve endings travels up the
spinal cord and is transmitted to regions of the medulla, thalamus, and
ultimately to somatosensory cortex, which is located in the postcentral
gyrus of the parietal lobe.

Pain Perception
---------------

Pain is an unpleasant experience that involves both physical and
psychological components. Feeling pain is quite adaptive because it
makes us aware of an injury, and it motivates us to remove ourselves
from the cause of that injury. In addition, pain also makes us less
likely to suffer additional injury because we will be gentler with our
injured body parts.

Generally speaking, pain can be considered to be neuropathic or
inflammatory in nature. Pain that signals some type of tissue damage is
known as **inflammatory pain**\ {: data-type=“term”}. In some
situations, pain results from damage to neurons of either the peripheral
or central nervous system. As a result, pain signals that are sent to
the brain get exaggerated. This type of pain is known as **neuropathic
pain**\ {: data-type=“term”}. Multiple treatment options for pain relief
range from relaxation therapy to the use of analgesic medications to
deep brain stimulation. The most effective treatment option for a given
individual will depend on a number of considerations, including the
severity and persistence of the pain and any medical/psychological
conditions.

Some individuals are born without the ability to feel pain. This very
rare genetic disorder is known as congenital insensitivity to pain (or
**congenital analgesia**\ {: data-type=“term”}). While those with
congenital analgesia can detect differences in temperature and pressure,
they cannot experience pain. As a result, they often suffer significant
injuries. Young children have serious mouth and tongue injuries because
they have bitten themselves repeatedly. Not surprisingly, individuals
suffering from this disorder have much shorter life expectancies due to
their injuries and secondary infections of injured sites (U.S. National
Library of Medicine, 2013).

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Watch this `video <http://openstax.org/l/congenital>`__ to learn more
   about congenital insensitivity to pain.

THE VESTIBULAR SENSE, PROPRIOCEPTION, AND KINESTHESIA
=====================================================

The **vestibular sense**\ {: data-type=“term”} contributes to our
ability to maintain balance and body posture. As
`[link] <#Figure_05_05_Vestibular>`__ shows, the major sensory organs
(utricle, saccule, and the three semicircular canals) of this system are
located next to the cochlea in the inner ear. The vestibular organs are
fluid-filled and have hair cells, similar to the ones found in the
auditory system, which respond to movement of the head and gravitational
forces. When these hair cells are stimulated, they send signals to the
brain via the vestibular nerve. Although we may not be consciously aware
of our vestibular system’s sensory information under normal
circumstances, its importance is apparent when we experience motion
sickness and/or dizziness related to infections of the inner ear (Khan &
Chang, 2013).

|An illustration of the vestibular system shows the locations of the
three canals (“posterior canal,” “horizontal canal,” and “superior
canal”) and the locations of the “urticle,” “oval window,” “cochlea,”
“basilar membrane and hair cells,” “saccule,” and “vestibule.”|\ {:
#Figure_05_05_Vestibular}

In addition to maintaining balance, the vestibular system collects
information critical for controlling movement and the reflexes that move
various parts of our bodies to compensate for changes in body position.
Therefore, both proprioception (perception of body position) and
kinesthesia (perception of the body’s movement through space) interact
with information provided by the vestibular system.

These sensory systems also gather information from receptors that
respond to stretch and tension in muscles, joints, skin, and tendons
(Lackner & DiZio, 2005; Proske, 2006; Proske & Gandevia, 2012).
Proprioceptive and kinesthetic information travels to the brain via the
spinal column. Several cortical regions in addition to the cerebellum
receive information from and send information to the sensory organs of
the proprioceptive and kinesthetic systems.

Summary
=======

Taste (gustation) and smell (olfaction) are chemical senses that employ
receptors on the tongue and in the nose that bind directly with taste
and odor molecules in order to transmit information to the brain for
processing. Our ability to perceive touch, temperature, and pain is
mediated by a number of receptors and free nerve endings that are
distributed throughout the skin and various tissues of the body. The
vestibular sense helps us maintain a sense of balance through the
response of hair cells in the utricle, saccule, and semi-circular canals
that respond to changes in head position and gravity. Our proprioceptive
and kinesthetic systems provide information about body position and body
movement through receptors that detect stretch and tension in the
muscles, joints, tendons, and skin of the body.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Chemical messages often sent between two members of a species to
      communicate something about reproductive status are called
      \________.

      1. hormones
      2. pheromones
      3. Merkel’s disks
      4. Meissner’s corpuscles {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which taste is associated with monosodium glutamate?

      1. sweet
      2. bitter
      3. umami
      4. sour {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      \_______\_ serve as sensory receptors for temperature and pain
      stimuli.

      1. free nerve endings
      2. Pacinian corpuscles
      3. Ruffini corpuscles
      4. Meissner’s corpuscles {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which of the following is involved in maintaining balance and body
      posture?

      1. auditory nerve
      2. nociceptors
      3. olfactory bulb
      4. vestibular system {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

Critical Thinking Question
==========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Many people experience nausea while traveling in a car, plane, or
      boat. How might you explain this as a function of sensory
      interaction?

   .. container::

      When traveling by car, we often have visual information that
      suggests that we are in motion while our vestibular sense
      indicates that we’re not moving (assuming we’re traveling at a
      relatively constant speed). Normally, these two sensory modalities
      provide congruent information, but the discrepancy might lead to
      confusion and nausea. The converse would be true when traveling by
      plane or boat.

.. container::

   .. container::

      If you heard someone say that they would do anything not to feel
      the pain associated with significant injury, how would you respond
      given what you’ve just read?

   .. container::

      Pain serves important functions that are critical to our survival.
      As noxious as pain stimuli may be, the experiences of individuals
      who suffer from congenital insensitivity to pain makes the
      consequences of a lack of pain all too apparent.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Do you think women experience pain differently than men? Why do
      you think this is?

   .. container::

      Research has shown that women and men do differ in their
      experience of and tolerance for pain: Women tend to handle pain
      better than men. Perhaps this is due to women’s labor and
      childbirth experience. Men tend to be stoic about their pain and
      do not seek help. Research also shows that gender differences in
      pain tolerance can vary across cultures.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      As mentioned earlier, a food’s flavor represents an interaction of
      both gustatory and olfactory information. Think about the last
      time you were seriously congested due to a cold or the flu. What
      changes did you notice in the flavors of the foods that you ate
      during this time?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   congenital insensitivity to pain (congenital analgesia)
      genetic disorder that results in the inability to experience pain
      ^
   inflammatory pain
      signal that some type of tissue damage has occurred ^
   kinesthesia
      perception of the body’s movement through space ^
   Meissner’s corpuscle
      touch receptor that responds to pressure and lower frequency
      vibrations ^
   Merkel’s disk
      touch receptor that responds to light touch ^
   neuropathic pain
      pain from damage to neurons of either the peripheral or central
      nervous system ^
   nociception
      sensory signal indicating potential harm and maybe pain ^
   olfactory bulb
      bulb-like structure at the tip of the frontal lobe, where the
      olfactory nerves begin ^
   olfactory receptor
      sensory cell for the olfactory system ^
   Pacinian corpuscle
      touch receptor that detects transient pressure and higher
      frequency vibrations ^
   pheromone
      chemical message sent by another individual ^
   proprioception
      perception of body position ^
   Ruffini corpuscle
      touch receptor that detects stretch ^
   taste bud
      grouping of taste receptor cells with hair-like extensions that
      protrude into the central pore of the taste bud ^
   thermoception
      temperature perception ^
   umami
      taste for monosodium glutamate ^
   vestibular sense
      contributes to our ability to maintain balance and body posture

.. |Illustration A shows a taste bud in an opening of the tongue, with the “tongue surface,” “taste pore,” “taste receptor cell” and “nerves” labeled. Part B is a micrograph showing taste buds on a human tongue.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_05_05_TasteBud.jpg
.. |An illustration shows a side view of a human head and the location of the “nasal cavity,” “olfactory receptors,” and “olfactory bulb.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_05_05_OlfacRecep.jpg
.. |An illustration shows “skin surface” underneath which different receptors are identified: the “pacinian corpuscle,” “ruffini corpuscle,” “merkel’s disk,” and “meissner’s corpuscle.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_05_05_Touch.jpg
.. |An illustration of the vestibular system shows the locations of the three canals (“posterior canal,” “horizontal canal,” and “superior canal”) and the locations of the “urticle,” “oval window,” “cochlea,” “basilar membrane and hair cells,” “saccule,” and “vestibule.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_05_05_Vestibular.jpg
