======================
Sleep and Why We Sleep
======================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Describe areas of
   the brain involved in sleep \* Understand hormone secretions
   associated with sleep \* Describe several theories aimed at
   explaining the function of sleep

We spend approximately one-third of our lives sleeping. Given the
average life expectancy for U.S. citizens falls between 73 and 79 years
old (Singh & Siahpush, 2006), we can expect to spend approximately 25
years of our lives sleeping. Some animals never sleep (e.g., several
fish and amphibian species); other animals can go extended periods of
time without sleep and without apparent negative consequences (e.g.,
dolphins); yet some animals (e.g., rats) die after two weeks of sleep
deprivation (Siegel, 2008). Why do we devote so much time to sleeping?
Is it absolutely essential that we sleep? This section will consider
these questions and explore various explanations for why we sleep.

WHAT IS SLEEP?
==============

You have read that sleep is distinguished by low levels of physical
activity and reduced sensory awareness. As discussed by Siegel (2008), a
definition of sleep must also include mention of the interplay of the
circadian and homeostatic mechanisms that regulate sleep. Homeostatic
regulation of sleep is evidenced by sleep rebound following sleep
deprivation. **Sleep rebound**\ {: data-type=“term”} refers to the fact
that a sleep-deprived individual will tend to take a shorter time to
fall asleep during subsequent opportunities for sleep. Sleep is
characterized by certain patterns of activity of the brain that can be
visualized using electroencephalography (EEG), and different phases of
sleep can be differentiated using EEG as well
(`[link] <#Figure_04_02_SleepEEG>`__).

|A polysonograph shows 14 rows of waves with some rows appearing
visually similar. Rows 1–2, rows 4–7, and rows 9–11 show similar
patterns. Rows 4–7 are outlined in read to emphasize the similarity in
wave patterns.|\ {: #Figure_04_02_SleepEEG}

Sleep-wake cycles seem to be controlled by multiple brain areas acting
in conjunction with one another. Some of these areas include the
thalamus, the hypothalamus, and the pons. As already mentioned, the
hypothalamus contains the SCN—the biological clock of the body—in
addition to other nuclei that, in conjunction with the thalamus,
regulate slow-wave sleep. The pons is important for regulating rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep (National Institutes of Health, n.d.).

Sleep is also associated with the secretion and regulation of a number
of hormones from several endocrine glands including: melatonin, follicle
stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and growth hormone
(National Institutes of Health, n.d.). You have read that the pineal
gland releases melatonin during sleep
(`[link] <#Figure_04_02_Pituitary>`__). Melatonin is thought to be
involved in the regulation of various biological rhythms and the immune
system (Hardeland et al., 2006). During sleep, the pituitary gland
secretes both FSH and LH which are important in regulating the
reproductive system (Christensen et al., 2012; Sofikitis et al., 2008).
The pituitary gland also secretes growth hormone, during sleep, which
plays a role in physical growth and maturation as well as other
metabolic processes (Bartke, Sun, & Longo, 2013).

|An illustration of a brain shows the locations of the hypothalamus,
thalamus, pons, suprachiasmatic nucleus, pituitary gland, and pineal
gland.|\ {: #Figure_04_02_Pituitary}

WHY DO WE SLEEP?
================

Given the central role that sleep plays in our lives and the number of
adverse consequences that have been associated with sleep deprivation,
one would think that we would have a clear understanding of why it is
that we sleep. Unfortunately, this is not the case; however, several
hypotheses have been proposed to explain the function of sleep.

Adaptive Function of Sleep
--------------------------

One popular hypothesis of sleep incorporates the perspective of
evolutionary psychology. **Evolutionary psychology**\ {:
data-type=“term”} is a discipline that studies how universal patterns of
behavior and cognitive processes have evolved over time as a result of
**natural selection**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}. Variations and
adaptations in cognition and behavior make individuals more or less
successful in reproducing and passing their genes to their offspring.
One hypothesis from this perspective might argue that sleep is essential
to restore resources that are expended during the day. Just as bears
hibernate in the winter when resources are scarce, perhaps people sleep
at night to reduce their energy expenditures. While this is an intuitive
explanation of sleep, there is little research that supports this
explanation. In fact, it has been suggested that there is no reason to
think that energetic demands could not be addressed with periods of rest
and inactivity (Frank, 2006; Rial et al., 2007), and some research has
actually found a negative correlation between energetic demands and the
amount of time spent sleeping (Capellini, Barton, McNamara, Preston, &
Nunn, 2008).

Another evolutionary hypothesis of sleep holds that our sleep patterns
evolved as an adaptive response to predatory risks, which increase in
darkness. Thus we sleep in safe areas to reduce the chance of harm.
Again, this is an intuitive and appealing explanation for why we sleep.
Perhaps our ancestors spent extended periods of time asleep to reduce
attention to themselves from potential predators. Comparative research
indicates, however, that the relationship that exists between predatory
risk and sleep is very complex and equivocal. Some research suggests
that species that face higher predatory risks sleep fewer hours than
other species (Capellini et al., 2008), while other researchers suggest
there is no relationship between the amount of time a given species
spends in deep sleep and its predation risk (Lesku, Roth, Amlaner, &
Lima, 2006).

It is quite possible that sleep serves no single universally adaptive
function, and different species have evolved different patterns of sleep
in response to their unique evolutionary pressures. While we have
discussed the negative outcomes associated with sleep deprivation, it
should be pointed out that there are many benefits that are associated
with adequate amounts of sleep. A few such benefits listed by the
National Sleep Foundation (n.d.) include maintaining healthy weight,
lowering stress levels, improving mood, and increasing motor
coordination, as well as a number of benefits related to cognition and
memory formation.

Cognitive Function of Sleep
---------------------------

Another theory regarding why we sleep involves sleep’s importance for
cognitive function and memory formation (Rattenborg, Lesku,
Martinez-Gonzalez, & Lima, 2007). Indeed, we know sleep deprivation
results in disruptions in cognition and memory deficits (Brown, 2012),
leading to impairments in our abilities to maintain attention, make
decisions, and recall long-term memories. Moreover, these impairments
become more severe as the amount of sleep deprivation increases (Alhola
& Polo-Kantola, 2007). Furthermore, slow-wave sleep after learning a new
task can improve resultant performance on that task (Huber, Ghilardi,
Massimini, & Tononi, 2004) and seems essential for effective memory
formation (Stickgold, 2005). Understanding the impact of sleep on
cognitive function should help you understand that cramming all night
for a test may be not effective and can even prove counterproductive.

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Watch this brief `video <http://openstax.org/l/sleepdeprived>`__
   describing sleep deprivation in college students.

   Here’s another brief `video <http://openstax.org/l/sleeptips>`__
   describing sleep tips for college students.

Sleep has also been associated with other cognitive benefits. Research
indicates that included among these possible benefits are increased
capacities for creative thinking (Cai, Mednick, Harrison, Kanady, &
Mednick, 2009; Wagner, Gais, Haider, Verleger, & Born, 2004), language
learning (Fenn, Nusbaum, & Margoliash, 2003; Gómez, Bootzin, & Nadel,
2006), and inferential judgments (Ellenbogen, Hu, Payne, Titone, &
Walker, 2007). It is possible that even the processing of emotional
information is influenced by certain aspects of sleep (Walker, 2009).

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Watch this brief `video <http://openstax.org/l/sleepmemory>`__
   describing the relationship between sleep and memory.

Summary
=======

We devote a very large portion of time to sleep, and our brains have
complex systems that control various aspects of sleep. Several hormones
important for physical growth and maturation are secreted during sleep.
While the reason we sleep remains something of a mystery, there is some
evidence to suggest that sleep is very important to learning and memory.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Growth hormone is secreted by the \_______\_ while we sleep.

      1. pineal gland
      2. thyroid
      3. pituitary gland
      4. pancreas {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      The \_______\_ plays a role in controlling slow-wave sleep.

      1. hypothalamus
      2. thalamus
      3. pons
      4. both a and b {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      \_______\_ is a hormone secreted by the pineal gland that plays a
      role in regulating biological rhythms and immune function.

      1. growth hormone
      2. melatonin
      3. LH
      4. FSH {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      \_______\_ appears to be especially important for enhanced
      performance on recently learned tasks.

      1. melatonin
      2. slow-wave sleep
      3. sleep deprivation
      4. growth hormone {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      If theories that assert sleep is necessary for restoration and
      recovery from daily energetic demands are correct, what do you
      predict about the relationship that would exist between
      individuals’ total sleep duration and their level of activity?

   .. container::

      Those individuals (or species) that expend the greatest amounts of
      energy would require the longest periods of sleep.

.. container::

   .. container::

      How could researchers determine if given areas of the brain are
      involved in the regulation of sleep?

   .. container::

      Researchers could use lesion or brain stimulation techniques to
      determine how deactivation or activation of a given brain region
      affects behavior. Furthermore, researchers could use any number of
      brain imaging techniques like fMRI or CT scans to come to these
      conclusions.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Differentiate the evolutionary theories of sleep and make a case
      for the one with the most compelling evidence.

   .. container::

      One evolutionary theory of sleep holds that sleep is essential for
      restoration of resources that are expended during the demands of
      day-to-day life. A second theory proposes that our sleep patterns
      evolved as an adaptive response to predatory risks, which increase
      in darkness. The first theory has little or no empirical support,
      and the second theory is supported by some, though not all,
      research.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Have you (or someone you know) ever experienced significant
      periods of sleep deprivation because of simple insomnia, high
      levels of stress, or as a side effect from a medication? What were
      the consequences of missing out on sleep?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   evolutionary psychology
      discipline that studies how universal patterns of behavior and
      cognitive processes have evolved over time as a result of natural
      selection ^
   sleep rebound
      sleep-deprived individuals will experience shorter sleep latencies
      during subsequent opportunities for sleep

.. |A polysonograph shows 14 rows of waves with some rows appearing visually similar. Rows 1–2, rows 4–7, and rows 9–11 show similar patterns. Rows 4–7 are outlined in read to emphasize the similarity in wave patterns.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_04_02_SleepEEG.jpg
.. |An illustration of a brain shows the locations of the hypothalamus, thalamus, pons, suprachiasmatic nucleus, pituitary gland, and pineal gland.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_04_02_Pituitary.jpg
