============
Introduction
============



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

class=“introduction”

class=“summary” title=“Summary”

class=“review-questions” title=“Review Questions”

class=“critical-thinking” title=“Critical Thinking Questions”

class=“personal-application” title=“Personal Application Questions”

class=“references” title=“References”

|A photograph shows two children running outside through an open
doorway.|\ {: #Figure_11_00_Siblings}

Three months before William Jefferson Blythe III was born, his father
died in a car accident. He was raised by his mother, Virginia Dell, and
grandparents, in Hope, Arkansas. When he turned 4, his mother married
Roger Clinton, Jr., an alcoholic who was physically abusive to William’s
mother. Six years later, Virginia gave birth to another son, Roger.
William, who later took the last name Clinton from his stepfather,
became the 42nd president of the United States. While Bill Clinton was
making his political ascendance, his half-brother, Roger Clinton, was
arrested numerous times for drug charges, including possession,
conspiracy to distribute cocaine, and driving under the influence,
serving time in jail. Two brothers, raised by the same people, took
radically different paths in their lives. Why did they make the choices
they did? What internal forces shaped their decisions? Personality
psychology can help us answer these questions and more.

References
==========

Adler, A. (1930). Individual psychology. In C. Murchison (Ed.),
*Psychologies of 1930* (pp. 395–405). Worcester, MA: Clark University
Press.

Adler, A. (1937). A school girl's exaggeration of her own importance.
*International Journal of Individual Psychology, 3*\ (1), 3–12.

Adler, A. (1956). *The individual psychology of Alfred Adler: A
systematic presentation in selections from his writings*. (C. H.
Ansbacher & R. Ansbacher, Eds.). New York: Harper.

Adler, A. (1961). The practice and theory of individual psychology. In
T. Shipley (Ed.), *Classics in psychology* (pp. 687–714). New York:
Philosophical Library

Adler, A. (1964). *Superiority and social interest*. New York: Norton.

Akomolafe, M. J. (2013). Personality characteristics as predictors of
academic performance of secondary school students. *Mediterranean
Journal of Social Sciences, 4*\ (2), 657–664.

Allport, G. W. & Odbert, H. S. (1936). Trait-names: A psycho-lexical
study. Albany, NY: Psychological Review Company.

Aronow, E., Weiss, K. A., & Rezinkoff, M. (2001). *A practical guide to
the Thematic Apperception Test.* Philadelphia: Brunner Routledge.

Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of
behavioral change. *Psychological Review, 84,* 191–215. 

Bandura, A. (1986). *Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory*.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Bandura, A. (1995). *Self-efficacy in changing societies.* Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.

Benassi, V. A., Sweeney, P. D., & Dufour, C. L. (1988). Is there a
relation between locus of control orientation and depression? *Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 97*\ (3), 357.

Ben-Porath, Y., & Tellegen, A. (2008). Minnesota Multiphasic Personality
Inventory-2-RF. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Benet-Martínez, V. & Karakitapoglu-Aygun, Z. (2003). The interplay of
cultural values and personality in predicting life-satisfaction:
Comparing Asian- and European-Americans. *Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 34,* 38–61.

Benet-Martínez, V., & Oishi, S. (2008). Culture and personality. In O.
P. John, R.W. Robins, L. A. Pervin (Eds.), *Handbook of personality:
Theory and research*. New York: Guildford Press.

Beutler, L. E., Nussbaum, P. D., & Meredith, K. E. (1988). Changing
personality patterns of police officers. *Professional Psychology:
Research and Practice, 19*\ (5), 503–507.

Bouchard, T., Jr. (1994). Genes, environment, and personality. *Science,
264,* 1700–1701.

Bouchard, T., Jr., Lykken, D. T., McGue, M., Segal, N. L., & Tellegen,
A. (1990). Sources of human psychological differences: The Minnesota
Study of Twins Reared Apart. *Science, 250,* 223–228.

Burger, J. (2008). *Personality* (7th ed.). Belmont, CA: Thompson Higher
Education.

Carter, J. E., and Heath, B. H. (1990). *Somatotyping: Development and
applications*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Carter, S., Champagne, F., Coates, S., Nercessian, E., Pfaff, D.,
Schecter, D., & Stern, N. B. (2008). *Development of temperament
symposium*. Philoctetes Center, New York.

Cattell, R. B. (1946\ *). The description and measurement of
personality*. New York: Harcourt, Brace, & World.

Cattell, R. B. (1957). *Personality and motivation structure and
measurement*. New York: World Book.

Chamorro-Premuzic, T., & Furnham, A. (2008). Personality, intelligence,
and approaches to learning as predictors of academic performance.
*Personality and Individual Differences, 44,* 1596–1603.

Cheung, F. M., van de Vijver, F. J. R., & Leong, F. T. L. (2011). Toward
a new approach to the study of personality in culture. *American
Psychologist, 66*\ (7), 593–603.

Clark, A. L., & Watson, D. (2008). Temperament: An organizing paradigm
for trait psychology. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Previn
(Eds.), *Handbook of personality: Theory and research* (3rd ed.,
pp. 265–286). New York: Guilford Press.

Conrad, N. & Party, M.W. (2012). Conscientiousness and academic
performance: A Mediational Analysis. International *Journal for the
Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 6* (1), 1–14.

Cortés, J., & Gatti, F. (1972). Delinquency and crime: A
biopsychological approach. New York: Seminar Press.

Costantino, G. (1982). TEMAS: A new technique for personality research
assessment of Hispanic children. Hispanic Research Center, Fordham
University *Research Bulletin*, *5,* 3–7.

Cramer, P. (2004). *Storytelling, narrative, and the Thematic
Apperception Test*. New York: Guilford Press.

Damon, S. (1955). Physique and success in military flying. *American
Journal of Physical* *Anthropology, 13*\ (2), 217–252.

Donnellan, M. B., & Lucas, R. E. (2008). Age differences in the big five
across the life span: Evidence from two national samples. *Psychology
and Aging, 23*\ (3), 558–566.

Duzant, R. (2005). *Differences of emotional tone and story length of
African American respondents when administered the Contemporized Themes
Concerning Blacks test versus the Thematic Apperception Test*.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, The Chicago School of Professional
Psychology, Chicago, IL.

Exner, J. E. (2002). *The Rorschach: Basic foundations and principles of
interpretation* (Vol. 1). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Eysenck, H. J. (1990). An improvement on personality inventory. *Current
Contents: Social and Behavioral Sciences, 22*\ (18), 20.

Eysenck, H. J. (1992). Four ways five factors are *not* basic.
*Personality and Individual Differences, 13,* 667–673.

Eysenck, H. J. (2009). *The biological basis of personality* (3rd ed.).
New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.

Eysenck, H. J. (1970). *The structure of human personality*. London, UK:
Methuen.

Eysenck, S. B. G., & Eysenck, H. J. (1963). The validity of
questionnaire and rating assessments of extroversion and neuroticism,
and their factorial stability\ *. British Journal of Psychology, 54,*
51–62.

Eysenck, H. J., & Eysenck, M. W. (1985\ *). Personality and individual
differences: A natural science approach*. New York: Plenum Press.

Eysenck, S. B. G., Eysenck, H. J., & Barrett, P. (1985). A revised
version of the psychoticism scale. *Personality and Individual
Differences, 6*\ (1), 21–29.

Fazeli, S. H. (2012). The exploring nature of the assessment instrument
of five factors of personality traits in the current studies of
personality. *Asian Social Science, 8*\ (2), 264–275.

Fancher, R. W. (1979). *Pioneers of psychology*. New York: Norton.

Freud, S. (1920). Resistance and suppression. *A general introduction to
psychoanalysis* (pp. 248–261). New York: Horace Liveright.

Freud, S. (1923/1949). The ego and the id. London: Hogarth.

Freud, S. (1931/1968). Female sexuality. In J. Strachey (Ed. &Trans.),
*The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund
Freud* (Vol. 21). London: Hogarth Press.

Funder, D. C. (2001). Personality. *Annual Review of Psychology, 52,*
197–221.

Hofstede, G. (2001). *Culture’s consequences: Comparing values,
behaviors, institutions, and organizations across nations* (2nd ed.).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Holaday, D., Smith, D. A., & Sherry, Alissa. (2010). Sentence completion
tests: A review of the literature and results of a survey of members of
the society for personality assessment. *Journal of Personality
Assessment, 74*\ (3), 371–383.

Hothersall, D. (1995). *History of psychology*. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Hoy, M. (1997). *Contemporizing of the Themes Concerning Blacks test
(C-TCB)*. Alameda, CA: California School of Professional Psychology.

Hoy-Watkins, M., & Jenkins-Moore, V. (2008). The Contemporized-Themes
Concerning Blacks Test (C-TCB). In S. R. Jenkins (Ed.), *A Handbook of
Clinical Scoring Systems for Thematic Apperceptive Techniques*
(pp. 659–698). New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Genovese, J. E. C. (2008). Physique correlates with reproductive success
in an archival sample of delinquent youth. *Evolutionary Psychology,
6*\ (3), 369-385.

Jang, K. L., Livesley, W. J., & Vernon, P. A. (1996). Heritability of
the big five personality dimensions and their facts: A twin study.
*Journal of Personality, 64*\ (3), 577–591.

Jang, K. L., Livesley, W. J., Ando, J., Yamagata, S., Suzuki, A.,
Angleitner, A., et al. (2006). Behavioral genetics of the higher-order
factors of the Big Five. *Personality and Individual Differences, 41,*
261–272.

Judge, T. A., Livingston, B. A., & Hurst, C. (2012). Do nice guys-and
gals- really finish last? The joint effects of sex and agreeableness on
income. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102*\ (2),
390–407.

Jung, C. G. (1923). *Psychological types. *\ New York: Harcourt Brace.

Jung, C. G. (1928). *Contributions to analytical psychology*. New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Jung, C. G. (1964). *Man and his symbols.* New York: Doubleday and
Company.

Jung, C., & Kerenyi, C. (1963). Science of mythology. In R. F. C. Hull
(Ed. & Trans.), Essays on the myth of the divine child and the mysteries
of Eleusis. New York: Harper & Row.

Launer, J. (2005). Anna O. and the ‘talking cure.’ *QJM: An
International Journal of Medicine, 98*\ (6), 465–466.

Lecci, L. B. & Magnavita, J. J. (2013). *Personality theories: A
scientific approach*. San Diego, CA: Bridgepoint Education.

Lefcourt, H. M. (1982). *Locus of control: Current trends in theory and
research* (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Lecci, L. B. & Magnavita, J. J. (2013). *Personality theories: A
scientific approach*. San Diego, CA: Bridgepoint Education.

Likert, R. (1932). A technique for the measurement of attitudes.
*Archives of Psychology, 140*, 1–55.

Lilienfeld, S. O., Wood, J. M., & Garb, H. N. (2000). The scientific
status of projective techniques. *Psychological Science in the Public
Interest, 1*\ (2), 27–66.

Maltby, J., Day, L., & Macaskill, A. (2007). *Personality, individual
differences and intelligence* (3rd ed.). UK: Pearson.

Maslow, A. H. (1970). *Motivation and personality*. New York: Harper &
Row.

Maslow, A. H. (1950). Self-actualizing people: A study of psychological
health. In W. Wolff (Ed.), *Personality Symposia: Symposium 1 on Values*
(pp. 11–34). New York: Grune & Stratton.

McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1997). Personality trait structure as a
human universal. *American Psychologist, 52*\ (5), 509–516.

McCrae, R. R., et al. (2005). Universal features of personality traits
from the observer’s perspective: Data from 50 cultures. *Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 88,* 547–561.

Mischel, W. (1993). *Introduction to personality* (5th ed.). Fort Worth,
TX: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Mischel, W., Ayduk, O., Berman, M. G., Casey, B. J., Gotlib, I. H.,
Jonides, J., et al. (2010). ‘Willpower’ over the life span: Decomposing
self-regulation. *Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 6*\ (2),
252–256.

Mischel, W., Ebbesen, E. B., & Raskoff Zeiss, A. (1972). Cognitive and
attentional mechanisms of delay in gratification. *Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 21*\ (2), 204–218.

Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1995). A cognitive-affective system theory of
personality: Reconceptualizing situations, dispositions, dynamics, and
invariance in personality structure. *Psychological Review, 102*\ (2),
246–268.

Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. L. (1989, May 26). Delay of
gratification in children. *Science, 244,* 933-938.

Motley, M. T. (2002). Theory of slips. In E. Erwin (Ed.), *The Freud
encyclopedia: Theory, therapy, and culture* (pp. 530–534). New York:
Routledge.

Noftle, E. E., & Robins, R. W. (2007). Personality predictors of
academic outcomes: Big Five correlates of GPA and SAT scores.
*Personality Processes and Individual Differences, 93,* 116–130.

Noga, A. (2007). *Passions and tempers: A history of the humors*. New
York: Harper Collins.

Oyserman, D., Coon, H., & Kemmelmier, M. (2002). Rethinking
individualism and collectivism: Evaluation of theoretical assumptions
and meta-analyses. *Psychological Bulletin, 128,* 3–72.

Parnell, R.W. (1958). *Behavior and physique: An introduction to
practical somatometry*. London, UK: Edward Arnold Publishers LTD.

Peterson, J., Liivamagi, J., & Koskel, S. (2006). Associations between
temperament types and body build in 17–22 year-old Estonian female
students. Papers on \ *Anthropology, 25,* 142–149.

Piotrowski, Z. A. (1987). *Perceptanalysis: The Rorschach method
fundamentally reworked, expanded and systematized*. London, UK:
Routledge.

Rafter, N. (2007). Somatotyping, antimodernism, and the production of
criminological knowledge. *Criminology, 45,* 805–833.

Rentfrow, P. J., Gosling, S. D., Jokela, M., Stillwell, D. J., Kosinski,
M., & Potter, J. (2013, October 14). Divided we stand: Three
psychological regions of the United States and their political,
economic, social, and health correlates. *Journal of Personality and
Social* *Psychology, 105*\ (6), 996–1012.

Roesler, C. (2012). Are archetypes transmitted more by culture than
biology? Questions arising from conceptualizations of the archetype.
*Journal of Analytical Psychology, 57*\ (2), 223–246.

Rogers, C. (1980). *A way of being*. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.

Rosenbaum, R. (1995, January 15). The great Ivy League posture photo
scandal. *The* *New York Times*, pp. A26.

Rothbart, M. K. (2011). *Becoming who we are: Temperament and
personality in* *development.* New York: Guilford Press.

Rothbart, M. K., Ahadi, S. A., & Evans, D. E. (2000). Temperament and
personality: Origins and outcomes. *Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 78*\ (1), 122–135.

Rothbart, M. K., & Derryberry, D. (1981). Development of individual
differences in temperament. In M. E. Lamb & A. L. Brown (Eds.),
*Advances in developmental* *psychology* (Vol. 1, pp. 37–86). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.

Rothbart, M. K., Sheese, B. E., Rueda, M. R., & Posner, M. I. (2011).
Developing mechanisms of self-regulation in early life. *Emotion Review,
3*\ (2), 207–213.

Rotter, J. (1966).\ ** **\ Generalized expectancies for internal versus
external control of reinforcements. *Psychological Monographs*, *80,*
609.

Rotter, J. B., & Rafferty, J. E. (1950). Manual the Rotter Incomplete
Sentences Blank College Form. New York: The Psychological Corporation.

Sanford, R. N., Adkins, M. M., Miller, R. B., & Cobb, E. A. (1943).
Physique, personality, and scholarship: A cooperative study of school
children. *Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
8*\ (1), 705.

Schmitt, D. P., Allik, J., McCrae, R. R., & Benet-Martinez, V. (2007).
The geographic distribution of Big Five personality traits: Patterns and
profiles of human self-description across 56 nations. *Journal of
Cross-Cultural Psychology, 38,* 173–212.

Scott, J. (2005). *Electra after Freud: Myth and culture*. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.

Segal, N. L. (2012). *Born together-reared apart: The landmark Minnesota
Twin Study*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Sheldon, W. H. (1940). *The varieties of human physique: An introduction
to* *constitutional psychology*. New York: Harper and Row.

Sheldon, W. H. (1942). *The varieties of temperament: A psychology of
constitutional differences*. New York: Harper and Row.

Sheldon, W.H. (1949). Varieties of delinquent youth: An introduction to
constitutional psychology. New York: Harper and Brothers.

Skinner, B. F. (1953). *Science and human behavior*. New York: The Free
Press.

Sotirova-Kohli, M., Opwis, K., Roesler, C., Smith, S. M., Rosen, D. H.,
Vaid, J., & Djnov, V. (2013). Symbol/meaning paired-associate recall: An
“archetypal memory” advantage? *Behavioral Sciences, 3,* 541–561.
Retrieved from http://www2.cnr.edu/home/araia/Myth\_%20Body.pdf

Stelmack, R. M., & Stalikas, A. (1991). Galen and the humour theory of
temperament. *Personal Individual Difference, 12*\ (3), 255–263.

Terracciano A., McCrae R. R., Brant L. J., Costa P. T., Jr. (2005).
Hierarchical linear modeling analyses of the NEO-PI-R scales in the
Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging. *Psychology and Aging, 20,*
493–506.

Thomas, A., & Chess, S. (1977). *Temperament and development*. New York:
Brunner/Mazel.

Tok, S. (2011). The big five personality traits and risky sport
participation. *Social Behavior and Personality: An International
Journal, 39*\ (8), 1105–1111.

Triandis, H. C. (1995). *Individualism and collectivism*. Boulder, CO:
Westview.

Triandis, H. C., & Suh, E. M. (2002). Cultural influences on
personality. *Annual Review of* *Psychology, 53,* 133–160.

Wagerman, S. A., & Funder, D. C. (2007). Acquaintance reports of
personality and academic achievement: A case for conscientiousness.
*Journal of Research in Personality, 41,* 221–229.

Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1984). Negative affectivity: The disposition
to experience aversive emotional states. *Psychological Bulletin, 96,*
465–490.

Weiner, I. B. (2003). *Principles of Rorschach interpretation*. Mahwah,
N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Whyte, C. (1980). An integrated counseling and learning center. In K. V.
Lauridsen (Ed.), *Examining the scope of learning centers* (pp. 33–43).
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Whyte, C. (1978). Effective counseling methods for high-risk college
freshmen. *Measurement and Evaluation in Guidance,* *6*\ (4), 198–200.

Whyte, C. B. (1977). High-risk college freshman and locus of
control. *The Humanist Educator, 16*\ (1), 2–5.

Williams, R. L. (1972). Themes Concerning Blacks: Manual. St. Louis, MO:
Williams.

Wundt, W. (1874/1886). *Elements du psychologie, physiologique* (2ieme
tome). [Elements of physiological psychology, Vol. 2]. (E. Rouvier,
Trans.). Paris: Ancienne Librairie Germer Bailliere et Cie.

Yang, K. S. (2006). Indigenous personality research: The Chinese case.
In U. Kim, K.-S. Yang, & K.-K. Hwang (Eds.), *Indigenous and cultural
psychology: Understanding people in context* (pp. 285–314). New York:
Springer.

Young-Eisendrath, P. (1995). *Myth and body: Pandora’s legacy in a
post-modern world.* Retrieved from
http://www2.cnr.edu/home/araia/Myth\_%20Body.pdf

.. |A photograph shows two children running outside through an open doorway.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_11_00_Siblings.jpg
