========
Language
========



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Define language
   and demonstrate familiarity with the components of language \*
   Understand how the use of language develops \* Explain the
   relationship between language and thinking

**Language**\ {: data-type=“term”} is a communication system that
involves using words and systematic rules to organize those words to
transmit information from one individual to another. While language is a
form of communication, not all communication is language. Many species
communicate with one another through their postures, movements, odors,
or vocalizations. This communication is crucial for species that need to
interact and develop social relationships with their conspecifics.
However, many people have asserted that it is language that makes humans
unique among all of the animal species (Corballis & Suddendorf, 2007;
Tomasello & Rakoczy, 2003). This section will focus on what
distinguishes language as a special form of communication, how the use
of language develops, and how language affects the way we think.

COMPONENTS OF LANGUAGE
======================

Language, be it spoken, signed, or written, has specific components: a
lexicon and grammar. **Lexicon**\ {: data-type=“term”} refers to the
words of a given language. Thus, lexicon is a language’s vocabulary.
**Grammar**\ {: data-type=“term”} refers to the set of rules that are
used to convey meaning through the use of the lexicon (Fernández &
Cairns, 2011). For instance, English grammar dictates that most verbs
receive an “-ed” at the end to indicate past tense.

Words are formed by combining the various phonemes that make up the
language. A **phoneme**\ {: data-type=“term”} (e.g., the sounds “ah”
vs. “eh”) is a basic sound unit of a given language, and different
languages have different sets of phonemes. Phonemes are combined to form
**morphemes**\ {: data-type=“term”}, which are the smallest units of
language that convey some type of meaning (e.g., “I” is both a phoneme
and a morpheme). We use semantics and syntax to construct language.
Semantics and syntax are part of a language’s grammar. **Semantics**\ {:
data-type=“term”} refers to the process by which we derive meaning from
morphemes and words. **Syntax**\ {: data-type=“term”} refers to the way
words are organized into sentences (Chomsky, 1965; Fernández & Cairns,
2011).

We apply the rules of grammar to organize the lexicon in novel and
creative ways, which allow us to communicate information about both
concrete and abstract concepts. We can talk about our immediate and
observable surroundings as well as the surface of unseen planets. We can
share our innermost thoughts, our plans for the future, and debate the
value of a college education. We can provide detailed instructions for
cooking a meal, fixing a car, or building a fire. The flexibility that
language provides to relay vastly different types of information is a
property that makes language so distinct as a mode of communication
among humans.

LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT
====================

Given the remarkable complexity of a language, one might expect that
mastering a language would be an especially arduous task; indeed, for
those of us trying to learn a second language as adults, this might seem
to be true. However, young children master language very quickly with
relative ease. B. F. **Skinner**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}
(1957) proposed that language is learned through reinforcement. Noam
**Chomsky**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} (1965) criticized this
behaviorist approach, asserting instead that the mechanisms underlying
language acquisition are biologically determined. The use of language
develops in the absence of formal instruction and appears to follow a
very similar pattern in children from vastly different cultures and
backgrounds. It would seem, therefore, that we are born with a
biological predisposition to acquire a language (Chomsky, 1965;
Fernández & Cairns, 2011). Moreover, it appears that there is a critical
period for language acquisition, such that this proficiency at acquiring
language is maximal early in life; generally, as people age, the ease
with which they acquire and master new languages diminishes (Johnson &
Newport, 1989; Lenneberg, 1967; Singleton, 1995).

Children begin to learn about language from a very early age
(`[link] <#Table_07_02_01>`__). In fact, it appears that this is
occurring even before we are born. Newborns show preference for their
mother’s voice and appear to be able to discriminate between the
language spoken by their mother and other languages. Babies are also
attuned to the languages being used around them and show preferences for
videos of faces that are moving in synchrony with the audio of spoken
language versus videos that do not synchronize with the audio (Blossom &
Morgan, 2006; Pickens, 1994; Spelke & Cortelyou, 1981).

.. raw:: html

   <table id="Table_07_02_01" summary="A three column table describes Stages of Language and Communication Development. The columns, from left to right, are labeled “Stage; Age; and Developmental Language and Communication.” The first row, respectively, reads: “1; 0–3 months; and reflexive communication.” The second row reads: “2; 3–8 months; and reflexive communication, interest in others.” The third row reads: “3; 8–13 months; and intentional communication, sociability.” The fourth row reads: “4; 12–18 months; and first words.” The fifth row reads: “5; 18–24 months; and simple sentences of two words.” The sixth row reads: “6; 2–3 years; and sentences of three or more words.” The seventh row reads: “7; 3–5 years; and complex sentences, has conversations.”">

.. raw:: html

   <caption>

Stages of Language and Communication Development

.. raw:: html

   </caption>

.. raw:: html

   <thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Stage

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Age

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Developmental Language and Communication

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tbody>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0–3 months

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Reflexive communication

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

2

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

3–8 months

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Reflexive communication; interest in others

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

3

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

8–13 months

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Intentional communication; sociability

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

4

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

12–18 months

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

First words

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

5

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

18–24 months

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Simple sentences of two words

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

6

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

2–3 years

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Sentences of three or more words

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

7

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

3–5 years

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Complex sentences; has conversations

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </tbody>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

.. container:: psychology dig-deeper

   .. container::

      The Case of Genie

   In the fall of 1970, a social worker in the Los Angeles area found a
   13-year-old girl who was being raised in extremely neglectful and
   abusive conditions. The girl, who came to be known as Genie, had
   lived most of her life tied to a potty chair or confined to a crib in
   a small room that was kept closed with the curtains drawn. For a
   little over a decade, Genie had virtually no social interaction and
   no access to the outside world. As a result of these conditions,
   Genie was unable to stand up, chew solid food, or speak (Fromkin,
   Krashen, Curtiss, Rigler, & Rigler, 1974; Rymer, 1993). The police
   took Genie into protective custody.

   Genie’s abilities improved dramatically following her removal from
   her abusive environment, and early on, it appeared she was acquiring
   language—much later than would be predicted by critical period
   hypotheses that had been posited at the time (Fromkin et al., 1974).
   Genie managed to amass an impressive vocabulary in a relatively short
   amount of time. However, she never developed a mastery of the
   grammatical aspects of language (Curtiss, 1981). Perhaps being
   deprived of the opportunity to learn language during a critical
   period impeded Genie’s ability to fully acquire and use language.

You may recall that each language has its own set of phonemes that are
used to generate morphemes, words, and so on. Babies can discriminate
among the sounds that make up a language (for example, they can tell the
difference between the “s” in vision and the “ss” in fission); early on,
they can differentiate between the sounds of all human languages, even
those that do not occur in the languages that are used in their
environments. However, by the time that they are about 1 year old, they
can only discriminate among those phonemes that are used in the language
or languages in their environments (Jensen, 2011; Werker & Lalonde,
1988; Werker & Tees, 1984).

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Visit this `website <http://openstax.org/l/language>`__ to learn more
   about how babies lose the ability to discriminate among all possible
   human phonemes as they age.

After the first few months of life, babies enter what is known as the
babbling stage, during which time they tend to produce single syllables
that are repeated over and over. As time passes, more variations appear
in the syllables that they produce. During this time, it is unlikely
that the babies are trying to communicate; they are just as likely to
babble when they are alone as when they are with their caregivers
(Fernández & Cairns, 2011). Interestingly, babies who are raised in
environments in which sign language is used will also begin to show
babbling in the gestures of their hands during this stage (Petitto,
Holowka, Sergio, Levy, & Ostry, 2004).

Generally, a child’s first word is uttered sometime between the ages of
1 year to 18 months, and for the next few months, the child will remain
in the “one word” stage of language development. During this time,
children know a number of words, but they only produce one-word
utterances. The child’s early vocabulary is limited to familiar objects
or events, often nouns. Although children in this stage only make
one-word utterances, these words often carry larger meaning (Fernández &
Cairns, 2011). So, for example, a child saying “cookie” could be
identifying a cookie or asking for a cookie.

As a child’s lexicon grows, she begins to utter simple sentences and to
acquire new vocabulary at a very rapid pace. In addition, children begin
to demonstrate a clear understanding of the specific rules that apply to
their language(s). Even the mistakes that children sometimes make
provide evidence of just how much they understand about those rules.
This is sometimes seen in the form of **overgeneralization**\ {:
data-type=“term”}. In this context, overgeneralization refers to an
extension of a language rule to an exception to the rule. For example,
in English, it is usually the case that an “s” is added to the end of a
word to indicate plurality. For example, we speak of one dog versus two
dogs. Young children will overgeneralize this rule to cases that are
exceptions to the “add an s to the end of the word” rule and say things
like “those two gooses” or “three mouses.” Clearly, the rules of the
language are understood, even if the exceptions to the rules are still
being learned (Moskowitz, 1978).

LANGUAGE AND THOUGHT
====================

When we speak one language, we agree that words are representations of
ideas, people, places, and events. The given language that children
learn is connected to their culture and surroundings. But can words
themselves shape the way we think about things? Psychologists have long
investigated the question of whether language shapes thoughts and
actions, or whether our thoughts and beliefs shape our language. Two
researchers, Edward Sapir and Benjamin Lee Whorf, began this
investigation in the 1940s. They wanted to understand how the language
habits of a community encourage members of that community to interpret
language in a particular manner (Sapir, 1941/1964). Sapir and Whorf
proposed that language determines thought, suggesting, for example, that
a person whose community language did not have past-tense verbs would be
challenged to think about the past (Whorf, 1956). Researchers have since
identified this view as too absolute, pointing out a lack of empiricism
behind what Sapir and Whorf proposed (Abler, 2013; Boroditsky, 2011; van
Troyer, 1994). Today, psychologists continue to study and debate the
relationship between language and thought.

.. container:: psychology what-do-you-think

   .. container::

      The Meaning of Language

   Think about what you know of other languages; perhaps you even speak
   multiple languages. Imagine for a moment that your closest friend
   fluently speaks more than one language. Do you think that friend
   thinks differently, depending on which language is being spoken? You
   may know a few words that are not translatable from their original
   language into English. For example, the Portuguese word saudade
   originated during the 15th century, when Portuguese sailors left home
   to explore the seas and travel to Africa or Asia. Those left behind
   described the emptiness and fondness they felt as saudade
   (`[link] <#Figure_07_02_Saudade>`__)\ *.* The word came to express
   many meanings, including loss, nostalgia, yearning, warm memories,
   and hope. There is no single word in English that includes all of
   those emotions in a single description. Do words such as *saudade*
   indicate that different languages produce different patterns of
   thought in people? What do you think??

   |Photograph A shows a painting of a person leaning against a ledge,
   slumped sideways over a box. Photograph B shows a painting of a
   person reading by a window.|\ {: #Figure_07_02_Saudade}

Language may indeed influence the way that we think, an idea known as
linguistic determinism. One recent demonstration of this phenomenon
involved differences in the way that English and Mandarin Chinese
speakers talk and think about time. English speakers tend to talk about
time using terms that describe changes along a horizontal dimension, for
example, saying something like “I’m running behind schedule” or “Don’t
get ahead of yourself.” While Mandarin Chinese speakers also describe
time in horizontal terms, it is not uncommon to also use terms
associated with a vertical arrangement. For example, the past might be
described as being “up” and the future as being “down.” It turns out
that these differences in language translate into differences in
performance on cognitive tests designed to measure how quickly an
individual can recognize temporal relationships. Specifically, when
given a series of tasks with vertical priming, Mandarin Chinese speakers
were faster at recognizing temporal relationships between months.
Indeed, Boroditsky (2001) sees these results as suggesting that “habits
in language encourage habits in thought” (p. 12).

One group of researchers who wanted to investigate how language
influences thought compared how English speakers and the Dani people of
Papua New Guinea think and speak about color. The Dani have two words
for color: one word for light and one word for *dark*. In contrast, the
English language has 11 color words. Researchers hypothesized that the
number of color terms could limit the ways that the Dani people
conceptualized color. However, the Dani were able to distinguish colors
with the same ability as English speakers, despite having fewer words at
their disposal (Berlin & Kay, 1969). A recent review of research aimed
at determining how language might affect something like color perception
suggests that language can influence perceptual phenomena, especially in
the left hemisphere of the brain. You may recall from earlier chapters
that the left hemisphere is associated with language for most people.
However, the right (less linguistic hemisphere) of the brain is less
affected by linguistic influences on perception (Regier & Kay, 2009)

Summary
=======

Language is a communication system that has both a lexicon and a system
of grammar. Language acquisition occurs naturally and effortlessly
during the early stages of life, and this acquisition occurs in a
predictable sequence for individuals around the world. Language has a
strong influence on thought, and the concept of how language may
influence cognition remains an area of study and debate in psychology.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      \_______\_ provides general principles for organizing words into
      meaningful sentences.

      1. Linguistic determinism
      2. Lexicon
      3. Semantics
      4. Syntax {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      \_______\_ are the smallest unit of language that carry meaning.

      1. Lexicon
      2. Phonemes
      3. Morphemes
      4. Syntax {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      The meaning of words and phrases is determined by applying the
      rules of \________.

      1. lexicon
      2. phonemes
      3. overgeneralization
      4. semantics {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      \_______\_ is (are) the basic sound units of a spoken language.

      1. Syntax
      2. Phonemes
      3. Morphemes
      4. Grammar {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      How do words not only represent our thoughts but also represent
      our values?

   .. container::

      People tend to talk about the things that are important to them or
      the things they think about the most. What we talk about,
      therefore, is a reflection of our values.

.. container::

   .. container::

      How could grammatical errors actually be indicative of language
      acquisition in children?

   .. container::

      People tend to talk about the things that are important to them or
      the things they think about the most. What we talk about,
      therefore, is a reflection of our values.

.. container::

   .. container::

      How do words not only represent our thoughts but also represent
      our values?

   .. container::

      Grammatical errors that involve overgeneralization of specific
      rules of a given language indicate that the child recognizes the
      rule, even if he or she doesn’t recognize all of the subtleties or
      exceptions involved in the rule’s application.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Can you think of examples of how language affects cognition?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   grammar
      set of rules that are used to convey meaning through the use of a
      lexicon ^
   language
      communication system that involves using words to transmit
      information from one individual to another ^
   lexicon
      the words of a given language ^
   morpheme
      smallest unit of language that conveys some type of meaning ^
   overgeneralization
      extension of a rule that exists in a given language to an
      exception to the rule ^
   phoneme
      basic sound unit of a given language ^
   semantics
      process by which we derive meaning from morphemes and words ^
   syntax
      manner by which words are organized into sentences

.. |Photograph A shows a painting of a person leaning against a ledge, slumped sideways over a box. Photograph B shows a painting of a person reading by a window.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_07_02_Saudade.jpg
