====================
How Memory Functions
====================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Discuss the three
   basic functions of memory \* Describe the three stages of memory
   storage \* Describe and distinguish between procedural and
   declarative memory and semantic and episodic memory

Memory is an information processing system; therefore, we often compare
it to a computer. **Memory**\ {: data-type=“term”} is the set of
processes used to encode, store, and retrieve information over different
periods of time (`[link] <#Figure_08_01_Memory>`__).

|A diagram shows three boxes, placed in a row from left to right,
respectively titled “Encoding,” “Storage,” and “Retrieval.” One
right-facing arrow connects “Encoding” to “Storage” and another connects
“Storage” to “Retrieval.”|\ {: #Figure_08_01_Memory}

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Watch `this video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sI_ceF5-OiQ>`__
   for more information on some unexpected facts about memory.

ENCODING
========

We get information into our brains through a process called
**encoding**\ {: data-type=“term”}, which is the input of information
into the memory system. Once we receive sensory information from the
environment, our brains label or code it. We organize the information
with other similar information and connect new concepts to existing
concepts. Encoding information occurs through automatic processing and
effortful processing.

If someone asks you what you ate for lunch today, more than likely you
could recall this information quite easily. This is known as **automatic
processing**\ {: data-type=“term”}, or the encoding of details like
time, space, frequency, and the meaning of words. Automatic processing
is usually done without any conscious awareness. Recalling the last time
you studied for a test is another example of automatic processing. But
what about the actual test material you studied? It probably required a
lot of work and attention on your part in order to encode that
information. This is known as **effortful processing**\ {:
data-type=“term”} (`[link] <#Figure_08_01_Driving>`__).

|A photograph shows a person driving a car.|\ {: #Figure_08_01_Driving}

What are the most effective ways to ensure that important memories are
well encoded? Even a simple sentence is easier to recall when it is
meaningful (Anderson, 1984). Read the following sentences (Bransford &
McCarrell, 1974), then look away and count backwards from 30 by threes
to zero, and then try to write down the sentences (no peeking back at
this page!).

1. The notes were sour because the seams split.
2. The voyage wasn't delayed because the bottle shattered.
3. The haystack was important because the cloth ripped. {: type=“1”}

How well did you do? By themselves, the statements that you wrote down
were most likely confusing and difficult for you to recall. Now, try
writing them again, using the following prompts: bagpipe, ship
christening, and parachutist. Next count backwards from 40 by fours,
then check yourself to see how well you recalled the sentences this
time. You can see that the sentences are now much more memorable because
each of the sentences was placed in context. Material is far better
encoded when you make it meaningful.

There are three types of encoding. The encoding of words and their
meaning is known as **semantic encoding**\ {: data-type=“term”}. It was
first demonstrated by William Bousfield (1935) in an experiment in which
he asked people to memorize words. The 60 words were actually divided
into 4 categories of meaning, although the participants did not know
this because the words were randomly presented. When they were asked to
remember the words, they tended to recall them in categories, showing
that they paid attention to the meanings of the words as they learned
them.

**Visual encoding**\ {: data-type=“term”} is the encoding of images, and
**acoustic encoding**\ {: data-type=“term”} is the encoding of sounds,
words in particular. To see how visual encoding works, read over this
list of words: *car, level, dog, truth, book, value*. If you were asked
later to recall the words from this list, which ones do you think you’d
most likely remember? You would probably have an easier time recalling
the words *car, dog,* and *book*, and a more difficult time recalling
the words *level, truth,* and *value*. Why is this? Because you can
recall images (mental pictures) more easily than words alone. When you
read the words *car, dog,* and *book* you created images of these things
in your mind. These are concrete, high-imagery words. On the other hand,
abstract words like *level, truth,* and *value* are low-imagery words.
High-imagery words are encoded both visually and semantically (Paivio,
1986), thus building a stronger memory.

Now let’s turn our attention to acoustic encoding. You are driving in
your car and a song comes on the radio that you haven’t heard in at
least 10 years, but you sing along, recalling every word. In the United
States, children often learn the alphabet through song, and they learn
the number of days in each month through rhyme: *“*\ Thirty days hath
September, / April, June, and November; / All the rest have thirty-one,
/ Save February, with twenty-eight days clear, / And twenty-nine each
leap year.” These lessons are easy to remember because of acoustic
encoding. We encode the sounds the words make. This is one of the
reasons why much of what we teach young children is done through song,
rhyme, and rhythm.

Which of the three types of encoding do you think would give you the
best memory of verbal information? Some years ago, psychologists Fergus
Craik and Endel Tulving (1975) conducted a series of experiments to find
out. Participants were given words along with questions about them. The
questions required the participants to process the words at one of the
three levels. The visual processing questions included such things as
asking the participants about the font of the letters. The acoustic
processing questions asked the participants about the sound or rhyming
of the words, and the semantic processing questions asked the
participants about the meaning of the words. After participants were
presented with the words and questions, they were given an unexpected
recall or recognition task.

Words that had been encoded semantically were better remembered than
those encoded visually or acoustically. Semantic encoding involves a
deeper level of processing than the shallower visual or acoustic
encoding. Craik and Tulving concluded that we process verbal information
best through semantic encoding, especially if we apply what is called
the self-reference effect. The **self-reference effect**\ {:
data-type=“term”} is the tendency for an individual to have better
memory for information that relates to oneself in comparison to material
that has less personal relevance (Rogers, Kuiper & Kirker, 1977). Could
semantic encoding be beneficial to you as you attempt to memorize the
concepts in this chapter?

STORAGE
=======

Once the information has been encoded, we have to somehow retain it. Our
brains take the encoded information and place it in storage.
**Storage**\ {: data-type=“term”} is the creation of a permanent record
of information.

In order for a memory to go into storage (i.e., long-term memory), it
has to pass through three distinct stages: **Sensory Memory**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}, **Short-Term Memory**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}, and finally **Long-Term Memory**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}. These stages were first proposed by
Richard **Atkinson**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} and Richard
**Shiffrin**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} (1968). Their model of
human memory (`[link] <#Figure_08_01_Atkinson>`__), called
Atkinson-Shiffrin (A-S), is based on the belief that we process memories
in the same way that a computer processes information.

|A flow diagram consists of four boxes with connecting arrows. The first
box is labeled “sensory input.” An arrow leads to the second box, which
is labeled “sensory memory.” An arrow leads to the third box which is
labeled “short-term memory (STM).” An arrow points to the fourth box,
labeled “long-term memory (LTM),” and an arrow points in the reverse
direction from the fourth to the third box. Above the short-term memory
box, an arrow leaves the top-right of the box and curves around to point
back to the top-left of the box; this arrow is labeled “rehearsal.” Both
the “sensory memory” and “short-term memory” boxes have an arrow beneath
them pointing to the text “information not transferred is lost.”|\ {:
#Figure_08_01_Atkinson}

But A-S is just one model of memory. Others, such as Baddeley and Hitch
(1974), have proposed a model where short-term memory itself has
different forms. In this model, storing memories in short-term memory is
like opening different files on a computer and adding information. The
type of short-term memory (or computer file) depends on the type of
information received. There are memories in visual-spatial form, as well
as memories of spoken or written material, and they are stored in three
short-term systems: a visuospatial sketchpad, an episodic buffer, and a
phonological loop. According to Baddeley and Hitch, a central executive
part of memory supervises or controls the flow of information to and
from the three short-term systems.

Sensory Memory
--------------

In the Atkinson-Shiffrin model, stimuli from the environment are
processed first in **sensory memory**\ {: data-type=“term”}: storage of
brief sensory events, such as sights, sounds, and tastes. It is very
brief storage—up to a couple of seconds. We are constantly bombarded
with sensory information. We cannot absorb all of it, or even most of
it. And most of it has no impact on our lives. For example, what was
your professor wearing the last class period? As long as the professor
was dressed appropriately, it does not really matter what she was
wearing. Sensory information about sights, sounds, smells, and even
textures, which we do not view as valuable information, we discard. If
we view something as valuable, the information will move into our
short-term memory system.

One study of sensory memory researched the significance of valuable
information on short-term memory storage. J. R. Stroop discovered a
memory phenomenon in the 1930s: you will name a color more easily if it
appears printed in that color, which is called the **Stroop effect**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}. In other words, the word “red” will be
named more quickly, regardless of the color the word appears in, than
any word that is colored red. Try an experiment: name the colors of the
words you are given in `[link] <#Figure_08_01_Stroop>`__. Do not read
the words, but say the color the word is printed in. For example, upon
seeing the word “yellow” in green print, you should say “green,” not
“yellow.” This experiment is fun, but it’s not as easy as it seems.

|Several names of colors appear in a font color that is different from
the name of the color. For example, the word “red” is colored blue.|\ {:
#Figure_08_01_Stroop}

Short-Term Memory
-----------------

**Short-term memory (STM)**\ {: data-type=“term”} is a temporary storage
system that processes incoming sensory memory; sometimes it is called
working memory. Short-term memory takes information from sensory memory
and sometimes connects that memory to something already in long-term
memory. Short-term memory storage lasts about 20 seconds. George Miller
(1956), in his research on the capacity of memory, found that most
people can retain about 7 items in STM. Some remember 5, some 9, so he
called the capacity of STM 7 plus or minus 2.

Think of short-term memory as the information you have displayed on your
computer screen—a document, a spreadsheet, or a web page. Then,
information in short-term memory goes to long-term memory (you save it
to your hard drive), or it is discarded (you delete a document or close
a web browser). This step of **rehearsal**\ {: data-type=“term”}, the
conscious repetition of information to be remembered, to move STM into
long-term memory is called **memory consolidation**\ {:
data-type=“term”}.

You may find yourself asking, “How much information can our memory
handle at once?” To explore the capacity and duration of your short-term
memory, have a partner read the strings of random numbers
(`[link] <#Figure_08_011_Numbers>`__) out loud to you, beginning each
string by saying, “Ready?” and ending each by saying, “Recall,” at which
point you should try to write down the string of numbers from memory.

|A series of numbers includes two rows, with six numbers in each row.
From left to right, the numbers increase from four digits to five, six,
seven, eight, and nine digits. The first row includes “9754,” “68259,”
“913825,” “5316842,” “86951372,” and “719384273,” and the second row
includes “6419,” “67148,” “648327,” “5963827,” “51739826,” and
“163875942.”|\ {: #Figure_08_011_Numbers}

Note the longest string at which you got the series correct. For most
people, this will be close to 7, Miller’s famous 7 plus or minus 2.
Recall is somewhat better for random numbers than for random letters
(Jacobs, 1887), and also often slightly better for information we hear
(acoustic encoding) rather than see (visual encoding) (Anderson, 1969).

Long-term Memory
----------------

**Long-term memory (LTM)**\ {: data-type=“term”} is the continuous
storage of information. Unlike short-term memory, the storage capacity
of LTM has no limits. It encompasses all the things you can remember
that happened more than just a few minutes ago to all of the things that
you can remember that happened days, weeks, and years ago. In keeping
with the computer analogy, the information in your LTM would be like the
information you have saved on the hard drive. It isn’t there on your
desktop (your short-term memory), but you can pull up this information
when you want it, at least most of the time. Not all long-term memories
are strong memories. Some memories can only be recalled through prompts.
For example, you might easily recall a fact— “What is the capital of the
United States?”—or a procedure—“How do you ride a bike?”—but you might
struggle to recall the name of the restaurant you had dinner when you
were on vacation in France last summer. A prompt, such as that the
restaurant was named after its owner, who spoke to you about your shared
interest in soccer, may help you recall the name of the restaurant.

Long-term memory is divided into two types: explicit and implicit
(`[link] <#Figure_08_01_Explicit>`__). Understanding the different types
is important because a person’s age or particular types of brain trauma
or disorders can leave certain types of LTM intact while having
disastrous consequences for other types. **Explicit memories**\ {:
data-type=“term”} are those we consciously try to remember and recall.
For example, if you are studying for your chemistry exam, the material
you are learning will be part of your explicit memory. (Note: Sometimes,
but not always, the terms explicit memory and declarative memory are
used interchangeably.)

**Implicit memories**\ {: data-type=“term”} are memories that are not
part of our consciousness. They are memories formed from behaviors.
Implicit memory is also called non-declarative memory.

|A diagram consists of three rows of boxes. The box in the top row is
labeled “long-term memory”; a line from the box separates into two lines
leading to two boxes on the second row, labeled “explicit (declarative)”
and “implicit (non-declarative).” From each of the second row boxes,
lines split and lead to two additional boxes. From the “explicit” box
are two boxes labeled “episodic (experienced events)” and “semantic
(knowledge and concepts).” From the “implicit” box are two boxes labeled
“procedural (skills and actions)” and “emotional conditioning.”|\ {:
#Figure_08_01_Explicit}

**Procedural memory**\ {: data-type=“term”} is a type of implicit
memory: it stores information about how to do things. It is the memory
for skilled actions, such as how to brush your teeth, how to drive a
car, how to swim the crawl (freestyle) stroke. If you are learning how
to swim freestyle, you practice the stroke: how to move your arms, how
to turn your head to alternate breathing from side to side, and how to
kick your legs. You would practice this many times until you become good
at it. Once you learn how to swim freestyle and your body knows how to
move through the water, you will never forget how to swim freestyle,
even if you do not swim for a couple of decades. Similarly, if you
present an accomplished guitarist with a guitar, even if he has not
played in a long time, he will still be able to play quite well.

**Declarative memory**\ {: data-type=“term”} has to do with the storage
of facts and events we personally experienced. Explicit (declarative)
memory has two parts: semantic memory and episodic memory. Semantic
means having to do with language and knowledge about language. An
example would be the question “what does *argumentative* mean?” Stored
in our **semantic memory**\ {: data-type=“term”} is knowledge about
words, concepts, and language-based knowledge and facts. For example,
answers to the following questions are stored in your semantic memory:

-  Who was the first President of the United States?
-  What is democracy?
-  What is the longest river in the world?

**Episodic memory**\ {: data-type=“term”} is information about events we
have personally experienced. The concept of episodic memory was first
proposed about 40 years ago (Tulving, 1972). Since then, Tulving and
others have looked at scientific evidence and reformulated the theory.
Currently, scientists believe that episodic memory is memory about
happenings in particular places at particular times, the what, where,
and when of an event (Tulving, 2002). It involves recollection of visual
imagery as well as the feeling of familiarity (Hassabis & Maguire,
2007).

.. container:: psychology everyday-connection

   .. container::

      Can You Remember Everything You Ever Did or Said?

   Episodic memories are also called autobiographical memories. Let’s
   quickly test your autobiographical memory. What were you wearing
   exactly five years ago today? What did you eat for lunch on April 10,
   2009? You probably find it difficult, if not impossible, to answer
   these questions. Can you remember every event you have experienced
   over the course of your life—meals, conversations, clothing choices,
   weather conditions, and so on? Most likely none of us could even come
   close to answering these questions; however, American actress Marilu
   **Henner**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}, best known for the
   television show *Taxi,* can remember. She has an amazing and highly
   superior autobiographical memory (`[link] <#Figure_08_01_Marilu>`__).

   |A photograph shows Marilu Henner.|\ {: #Figure_08_01_Marilu}

   Very few people can recall events in this way; right now, only 12
   known individuals have this ability, and only a few have been studied
   (Parker, Cahill & McGaugh 2006). And although **hyperthymesia**\ {:
   data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} normally appears in adolescence, two
   children in the United States appear to have memories from well
   before their tenth birthdays.

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Watch these `Part 1 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u-SBTRLoPuo>`__
   and `Part 2 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I4V6aoYuDcg>`__ video
   clips on superior autobiographical memory from the television news
   show *60 Minutes*.

RETRIEVAL
=========

So you have worked hard to encode (via effortful processing) and store
some important information for your upcoming final exam. How do you get
that information back out of storage when you need it? The act of
getting information out of memory storage and back into conscious
awareness is known as **retrieval**\ {: data-type=“term”}. This would be
similar to finding and opening a paper you had previously saved on your
computer’s hard drive. Now it’s back on your desktop, and you can work
with it again. Our ability to retrieve information from long-term memory
is vital to our everyday functioning. You must be able to retrieve
information from memory in order to do everything from knowing how to
brush your hair and teeth, to driving to work, to knowing how to perform
your job once you get there.

There are three ways you can retrieve information out of your long-term
memory storage system: recall, recognition, and relearning.
**Recall**\ {: data-type=“term”} is what we most often think about when
we talk about memory retrieval: it means you can access information
without cues. For example, you would use recall for an essay test.
**Recognition**\ {: data-type=“term”} happens when you identify
information that you have previously learned after encountering it
again. It involves a process of comparison. When you take a
multiple-choice test, you are relying on recognition to help you choose
the correct answer. Here is another example. Let’s say you graduated
from high school 10 years ago, and you have returned to your hometown
for your 10-year reunion. You may not be able to recall all of your
classmates, but you recognize many of them based on their yearbook
photos.

The third form of retrieval is **relearning**\ {: data-type=“term”}, and
it’s just what it sounds like. It involves learning information that you
previously learned. Whitney took Spanish in high school, but after high
school she did not have the opportunity to speak Spanish. Whitney is now
31, and her company has offered her an opportunity to work in their
Mexico City office. In order to prepare herself, she enrolls in a
Spanish course at the local community center. She’s surprised at how
quickly she’s able to pick up the language after not speaking it for 13
years; this is an example of relearning.

Summary
=======

Memory is a system or process that stores what we learn for future use.

Our memory has three basic functions: encoding, storing, and retrieving
information. Encoding is the act of getting information into our memory
system through automatic or effortful processing. Storage is retention
of the information, and retrieval is the act of getting information out
of storage and into conscious awareness through recall, recognition, and
relearning. The idea that information is processed through three memory
systems is called the Atkinson-Shiffrin (A-S) model of memory. First,
environmental stimuli enter our sensory memory for a period of less than
a second to a few seconds. Those stimuli that we notice and pay
attention to then move into short-term memory (also called working
memory). According to the A-S model, if we rehearse this information,
then it moves into long-term memory for permanent storage. Other models
like that of Baddeley and Hitch suggest there is more of a feedback loop
between short-term memory and long-term memory. Long-term memory has a
practically limitless storage capacity and is divided into implicit and
explicit memory. Finally, retrieval is the act of getting memories out
of storage and back into conscious awareness. This is done through
recall, recognition, and relearning.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      \_______\_ is another name for short-term memory.

      1. sensory memory
      2. episodic memory
      3. working memory
      4. implicit memory {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      The storage capacity of long-term memory is \________.

      1. one or two bits of information
      2. seven bits, plus or minus two
      3. limited
      4. essentially limitless {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      The three functions of memory are \________.

      1. automatic processing, effortful processing, and storage
      2. encoding, processing, and storage
      3. automatic processing, effortful processing, and retrieval
      4. encoding, storage, and retrieval {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Compare and contrast implicit and explicit memory.

   .. container::

      Both are types of long-term memory. Explicit memories are memories
      we consciously try to remember and recall. Explicit memory is also
      called declarative memory and is subdivided into episodic memory
      (life events) and semantic memory (words, ideas, and concepts).
      Implicit memories are memories that are not part of our
      consciousness; they are memories formed from behaviors. Implicit
      memory is also called non-declarative memory and includes
      procedural memory as well as things learned through classical
      conditioning.

.. container::

   .. container::

      According to the Atkinson-Shiffrin model, name and describe the
      three stages of memory.

   .. container::

      According to the Atkinson-Shiffrin model, memory is processed in
      three stages. The first is sensory memory; this is very brief: 1–2
      seconds. Anything not attended to is ignored. The stimuli we pay
      attention to then move into our short-term memory. Short-term
      memory can hold approximately 7 bits of information for around 20
      seconds. Information here is either forgotten, or it is encoded
      into long-term memory through the process of rehearsal. Long-term
      memory is the permanent storage of information—its capacity is
      basically unlimited.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Compare and contrast the two ways in which we encode information.

   .. container::

      Information is encoded through automatic or effortful processing.
      Automatic processing refers to all information that enters
      long-term memory without conscious effort. This includes things
      such as time, space, and frequency—for example, your ability to
      remember what you ate for breakfast today or the fact that you
      remember that you ran into your best friend in the supermarket
      twice this week. Effortful processing refers to encoding
      information through conscious attention and effort. Material that
      you study for a test requires effortful processing.

Personal Application Questions
==============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Describe something you have learned that is now in your procedural
      memory. Discuss how you learned this information.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Describe something you learned in high school that is now in your
      semantic memory.

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   acoustic encoding
      input of sounds, words, and music ^
   Atkinson-Shiffrin model (A-S)
      memory model that states we process information through three
      systems: sensory memory, short-term memory, and long-term memory ^
   automatic processing
      encoding of informational details like time, space, frequency, and
      the meaning of words ^
   declarative memory
      type of long-term memory of facts and events we personally
      experience ^
   effortful processing
      encoding of information that takes effort and attention ^
   encoding
      input of information into the memory system ^
   episodic memory
      type of declarative memory that contains information about events
      we have personally experienced, also known as autobiographical
      memory ^
   explicit memory
      memories we consciously try to remember and recall ^
   implicit memory
      memories that are not part of our consciousness ^
   long-term memory (LTM)
      continuous storage of information ^
   memory
      system or process that stores what we learn for future use ^
   memory consolidation
      active rehearsal to move information from short-term memory into
      long-term memory ^
   procedural memory
      type of long-term memory for making skilled actions, such as how
      to brush your teeth, how to drive a car, and how to swim ^
   recall
      accessing information without cues ^
   recognition
      identifying previously learned information after encountering it
      again, usually in response to a cue ^
   rehearsal
      conscious repetition of information to be remembered ^
   relearning
      learning information that was previously learned ^
   retrieval
      act of getting information out of long-term memory storage and
      back into conscious awareness ^
   self-reference effect
      tendency for an individual to have better memory for information
      that relates to oneself in comparison to material that has less
      personal relevance ^
   semantic encoding
      input of words and their meaning ^
   semantic memory
      type of declarative memory about words, concepts, and
      language-based knowledge and facts ^
   sensory memory
      storage of brief sensory events, such as sights, sounds, and
      tastes ^
   short-term memory (STM)
      (also, working memory) holds about seven bits of information
      before it is forgotten or stored, as well as information that has
      been retrieved and is being used ^
   storage
      creation of a permanent record of information ^
   visual encoding
      input of images

.. |A diagram shows three boxes, placed in a row from left to right, respectively titled “Encoding,” “Storage,” and “Retrieval.” One right-facing arrow connects “Encoding” to “Storage” and another connects “Storage” to “Retrieval.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_08_01_Memory.jpg
.. |A photograph shows a person driving a car.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_08_01_Drivingn.jpg
.. |A flow diagram consists of four boxes with connecting arrows. The first box is labeled “sensory input.” An arrow leads to the second box, which is labeled “sensory memory.” An arrow leads to the third box which is labeled “short-term memory (STM).” An arrow points to the fourth box, labeled “long-term memory (LTM),” and an arrow points in the reverse direction from the fourth to the third box. Above the short-term memory box, an arrow leaves the top-right of the box and curves around to point back to the top-left of the box; this arrow is labeled “rehearsal.” Both the “sensory memory” and “short-term memory” boxes have an arrow beneath them pointing to the text “information not transferred is lost.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_08_01_Atkinson.jpg
.. |Several names of colors appear in a font color that is different from the name of the color. For example, the word “red” is colored blue.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_08_01_Stroop.jpg
.. |A series of numbers includes two rows, with six numbers in each row. From left to right, the numbers increase from four digits to five, six, seven, eight, and nine digits. The first row includes “9754,” “68259,” “913825,” “5316842,” “86951372,” and “719384273,” and the second row includes “6419,” “67148,” “648327,” “5963827,” “51739826,” and “163875942.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_08_01_Numbers.jpg
.. |A diagram consists of three rows of boxes. The box in the top row is labeled “long-term memory”; a line from the box separates into two lines leading to two boxes on the second row, labeled “explicit (declarative)” and “implicit (non-declarative).” From each of the second row boxes, lines split and lead to two additional boxes. From the “explicit” box are two boxes labeled “episodic (experienced events)” and “semantic (knowledge and concepts).” From the “implicit” box are two boxes labeled “procedural (skills and actions)” and “emotional conditioning.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_08_01_Explicit.jpg
.. |A photograph shows Marilu Henner.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_08_01_Marilu.jpg
