=============================
What Is Lifespan Development?
=============================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Define and
   distinguish between the three domains of development: physical,
   cognitive and psychosocial \* Discuss the normative approach to
   development \* Understand the three major issues in development:
   continuity and discontinuity, one common course of development or
   many unique courses of development, and nature versus nurture

..

   My heart leaps up when I behold \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

   A rainbow in the sky: \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

   So was it when my life began; \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

   So is it now I am a man; \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

   So be it when I shall grow old, \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

   Or let me die! \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

   The Child is father of the Man; \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

   I could wish my days to be \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

   Bound each to each by natural piety. (Wordsworth, 1802)

In this poem, William Wordsworth writes, “the child is father of the
man.” What does this seemingly incongruous statement mean, and what does
it have to do with lifespan development? Wordsworth might be suggesting
that the person he is as an adult depends largely on the experiences he
had in childhood. Consider the following questions: To what extent is
the adult you are today influenced by the child you once were? To what
extent is a child fundamentally different from the adult he grows up to
be?

These are the types of questions developmental psychologists try to
answer, by studying how humans change and grow from conception through
childhood, adolescence, adulthood, and death. They view development as a
lifelong process that can be studied scientifically across three
developmental domains—physical, cognitive, and psychosocial development.
**Physical development**\ {: data-type=“term”} involves growth and
changes in the body and brain, the senses, motor skills, and health and
wellness. **Cognitive development**\ {: data-type=“term”} involves
learning, attention, memory, language, thinking, reasoning, and
creativity. **Psychosocial development**\ {: data-type=“term”} involves
emotions, personality, and social relationships. We refer to these
domains throughout the chapter.

.. container:: psychology connect-the-concepts

   .. container::

      Research Methods in Developmental Psychology

   You’ve learned about a variety of research methods used by
   psychologists. Developmental psychologists use many of these
   approaches in order to better understand how individuals change
   mentally and physically over time. These methods include naturalistic
   observations, case studies, surveys, and experiments, among others.

   Naturalistic observations involve observing behavior in its natural
   context. A developmental psychologist might observe how children
   behave on a playground, at a daycare center, or in the child’s own
   home. While this research approach provides a glimpse into how
   children behave in their natural settings, researchers have very
   little control over the types and/or frequencies of displayed
   behavior.

   In a case study, developmental psychologists collect a great deal of
   information from one individual in order to better understand
   physical and psychological changes over the lifespan. This particular
   approach is an excellent way to better understand individuals, who
   are exceptional in some way, but it is especially prone to researcher
   bias in interpretation, and it is difficult to generalize conclusions
   to the larger population.

   In one classic example of this research method being applied to a
   study of lifespan development Sigmund Freud analyzed the development
   of a child known as “Little Hans” (Freud, 1909/1949). Freud’s
   findings helped inform his theories of psychosexual development in
   children, which you will learn about later in this chapter. Little
   Genie, the subject of a case study discussed in the chapter on
   thinking and intelligence, provides another example of how
   psychologists examine developmental milestones through detailed
   research on a single individual. In Genie’s case, her neglectful and
   abusive upbringing led to her being unable to speak until, at age 13,
   she was removed from that harmful environment. As she learned to use
   language, psychologists were able to compare how her language
   acquisition abilities differed when occurring in her late-stage
   development compared to the typical acquisition of those skills
   during the ages of infancy through early childhood (Fromkin, Krashen,
   Curtiss, Rigler, & Rigler, 1974; Curtiss, 1981).

   The survey method asks individuals to self-report important
   information about their thoughts, experiences, and beliefs. This
   particular method can provide large amounts of information in
   relatively short amounts of time; however, validity of data collected
   in this way relies on honest self-reporting, and the data is
   relatively shallow when compared to the depth of information
   collected in a case study.

   Experiments involve significant control over extraneous variables and
   manipulation of the independent variable. As such, experimental
   research allows developmental psychologists to make causal statements
   about certain variables that are important for the developmental
   process. Because experimental research must occur in a controlled
   environment, researchers must be cautious about whether behaviors
   observed in the laboratory translate to an individual’s natural
   environment.

   Later in this chapter, you will learn about several experiments in
   which toddlers and young children observe scenes or actions so that
   researchers can determine at what age specific cognitive abilities
   develop. For example, children may observe a quantity of liquid
   poured from a short, fat glass into a tall, skinny glass. As the
   experimenters question the children about what occurred, the
   subjects’ answers help psychologists understand at what age a child
   begins to comprehend that the volume of liquid remained the same
   although the shapes of the containers differs.

Across these three domains—physical, cognitive, and psychosocial—the
**normative approach**\ {: data-type=“term”} to development is also
discussed. This approach asks, “What is normal development?” In the
early decades of the 20th century, normative psychologists studied large
numbers of children at various ages to determine norms (i.e., average
ages) of when most children reach specific developmental milestones in
each of the three domains (Gesell, 1933, 1939, 1940; Gesell & Ilg, 1946;
Hall, 1904). Although children develop at slightly different rates, we
can use these age-related averages as general guidelines to compare
children with same-age peers to determine the approximate ages they
should reach specific normative events called **developmental
milestones**\ {: data-type=“term”} (e.g., crawling, walking, writing,
dressing, naming colors, speaking in sentences, and starting puberty).

Not all normative events are universal, meaning they are not experienced
by all individuals across all cultures. Biological milestones, such as
puberty, tend to be universal, but social milestones, such as the age
when children begin formal schooling, are not necessarily universal;
instead, they affect most individuals in a particular **culture**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} (Gesell & Ilg, 1946). For example, in
developed countries children begin school around 5 or 6 years old, but
in developing countries, like Nigeria, children often enter school at an
advanced age, if at all (Huebler, 2005; United Nations Educational,
Scientific, and Cultural Organization [UNESCO], 2013).

To better understand the normative approach, imagine two new mothers,
Louisa and Kimberly, who are close friends and have children around the
same age. Louisa’s daughter is 14 months old, and Kimberly’s son is 12
months old. According to the normative approach, the average age a child
starts to walk is 12 months. However, at 14 months Louisa’s daughter
still isn’t walking. She tells Kimberly she is worried that something
might be wrong with her baby. Kimberly is surprised because her son
started walking when he was only 10 months old. Should Louisa be
worried? Should she be concerned if her daughter is not walking by 15
months or 18 months?

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) describes the
   developmental milestones for children from 2 months through 5 years
   old. After reviewing the information, take this
   `quiz <http://openstax.org/l/milestones>`__ to see how well you
   recall what you’ve learned. If you are a parent with concerns about
   your child’s development, contact your pediatrician.

ISSUES IN DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY
==================================

There are many different theoretical approaches regarding human
development. As we evaluate them in this chapter, recall that
developmental psychology focuses on how people change, and keep in mind
that all the approaches that we present in this chapter address
questions of change: Is the change smooth or uneven (continuous versus
discontinuous)? Is this pattern of change the same for everyone, or are
there many different patterns of change (one course of development
versus many courses)? How do genetics and environment interact to
influence development (nature versus nurture)?

Is Development Continuous or Discontinuous?
-------------------------------------------

**Continuous development**\ {: data-type=“term”} views development as a
cumulative process, gradually improving on existing skills
(`[link] <#Figure_09_01_Develop>`__). With this type of development,
there is gradual change. Consider, for example, a child’s physical
growth: adding inches to her height year by year. In contrast, theorists
who view development as **discontinuous**\ {: data-type=“term”} believe
that development takes place in unique stages: It occurs at specific
times or ages. With this type of development, the change is more sudden,
such as an infant’s ability to conceive object permanence.

|Continuous and Discontinuous development are shown side by side using
two separate pictures. The first picture is a triangle labeled
“Continuous Development” which slopes upward from Infancy to Adulthood
in a straight line. The second picture is 4 bars side by side labeled
“Discontinuous Development” which get higher from Infancy to Adulthood.
These bars resemble a staircase.|\ {: #Figure_09_01_Develop}

Is There One Course of Development or Many?
-------------------------------------------

Is development essentially the same, or universal, for all children
(i.e., there is one course of development) or does development follow a
different course for each child, depending on the child’s specific
genetics and environment (i.e., there are many courses of development)?
Do people across the world share more similarities or more differences
in their development? How much do culture and genetics influence a
child’s behavior?

Stage theories hold that the sequence of development is universal. For
example, in cross-cultural studies of language development, children
from around the world reach language milestones in a similar sequence
(Gleitman & Newport, 1995). Infants in all cultures coo before they
babble. They begin babbling at about the same age and utter their first
word around 12 months old. Yet we live in diverse contexts that have a
unique effect on each of us. For example, researchers once believed that
motor development follows one course for all children regardless of
culture. However, child care practices vary by culture, and different
practices have been found to accelerate or inhibit achievement of
developmental milestones such as sitting, crawling, and walking
(Karasik, Adolph, Tamis-LeMonda, & Bornstein, 2010).

For instance, let’s look at the Aché society in Paraguay. They spend a
significant amount of time foraging in forests. While foraging, Aché
mothers carry their young children, rarely putting them down in order to
protect them from getting hurt in the forest. Consequently, their
children walk much later: They walk around 23–25 months old, in
comparison to infants in Western cultures who begin to walk around 12
months old. However, as Aché children become older, they are allowed
more freedom to move about, and by about age 9, their motor skills
surpass those of U.S. children of the same age: Aché children are able
to climb trees up to 25 feet tall and use machetes to chop their way
through the forest (Kaplan & Dove, 1987). As you can see, our
development is influenced by multiple contexts, so the timing of basic
motor functions may vary across cultures. However, the functions
themselves are present in all societies
(`[link] <#Figure_09_01_Play>`__).

|Photograph A shows two children wearing inner tubes playing in the
shallow water at the beach. Photograph B shows two children playing in
the sand at a beach.|\ {: #Figure_09_01_Play}

How Do Nature and Nurture Influence Development?
------------------------------------------------

Are we who we are because of **nature**\ {: data-type=“term”} (biology
and genetics), or are we who we are because of **nurture**\ {:
data-type=“term”} (our environment and culture)? This longstanding
question is known in psychology as the nature versus nurture debate. It
seeks to understand how our personalities and traits are the product of
our genetic makeup and biological factors, and how they are shaped by
our environment, including our parents, peers, and culture. For
instance, why do biological children sometimes act like their parents—is
it because of genetics or because of early childhood environment and
what the child has learned from the parents? What about children who are
adopted—are they more like their biological families or more like their
adoptive families? And how can siblings from the same family be so
different?

We are all born with specific genetic traits inherited from our parents,
such as eye color, height, and certain personality traits. Beyond our
basic genotype, however, there is a deep interaction between our genes
and our environment: Our unique experiences in our environment influence
whether and how particular traits are expressed, and at the same time,
our genes influence how we interact with our environment (Diamond, 2009;
Lobo, 2008). This chapter will show that there is a reciprocal
interaction between nature and nurture as they both shape who we become,
but the debate continues as to the relative contributions of each.

.. container:: psychology dig-deeper

   .. container::

      The Achievement Gap: How Does Socioeconomic Status Affect
      Development?

   The achievement gap refers to the persistent difference in grades,
   test scores, and graduation rates that exist among students of
   different ethnicities, races, and—in certain subjects—sexes
   (Winerman, 2011). Research suggests that these achievement gaps are
   strongly influenced by differences in socioeconomic factors that
   exist among the families of these children. While the researchers
   acknowledge that programs aimed at reducing such socioeconomic
   discrepancies would likely aid in equalizing the aptitude and
   performance of children from different backgrounds, they recognize
   that such large-scale interventions would be difficult to achieve.
   Therefore, it is recommended that programs aimed at fostering
   aptitude and achievement among disadvantaged children may be the best
   option for dealing with issues related to academic achievement gaps
   (Duncan & Magnuson, 2005).

   Low-income children perform significantly more poorly than their
   middle- and high-income peers on a number of educational variables:
   They have significantly lower standardized test scores, graduation
   rates, and college entrance rates, and they have much higher school
   dropout rates. There have been attempts to correct the achievement
   gap through state and federal legislation, but what if the problems
   start before the children even enter school?

   Psychologists Betty Hart and Todd Risley (2006) spent their careers
   looking at early language ability and progression of children in
   various income levels. In one longitudinal study, they found that
   although all the parents in the study engaged and interacted with
   their children, middle- and high-income parents interacted with their
   children differently than low-income parents. After analyzing 1,300
   hours of parent-child interactions, the researchers found that
   middle- and high-income parents talk to their children significantly
   more, starting when the children are infants. By 3 years old,
   high-income children knew almost double the number of words known by
   their low-income counterparts, and they had heard an estimated total
   of 30 million more words than the low-income counterparts (Hart &
   Risley, 2003). And the gaps only become more pronounced. Before
   entering kindergarten, high-income children score 60% higher on
   achievement tests than their low-income peers (Lee & Burkam, 2002).

   There are solutions to this problem. At the University of Chicago,
   experts are working with low-income families, visiting them at their
   homes, and encouraging them to speak more to their children on a
   daily and hourly basis. Other experts are designing preschools in
   which students from diverse economic backgrounds are placed in the
   same classroom. In this research, low-income children made
   significant gains in their language development, likely as a result
   of attending the specialized preschool (Schechter & Byeb, 2007). What
   other methods or interventions could be used to decrease the
   achievement gap? What types of activities could be implemented to
   help the children of your community or a neighboring community?

Summary
=======

Lifespan development explores how we change and grow from conception to
death. This field of psychology is studied by developmental
psychologists. They view development as a lifelong process that can be
studied scientifically across three developmental domains: physical,
cognitive development, and psychosocial. There are several theories of
development that focus on the following issues: whether development is
continuous or discontinuous, whether development follows one course or
many, and the relative influence of nature versus nurture on
development.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      The view that development is a cumulative process, gradually
      adding to the same type of skills is known as \________.

      1. nature
      2. nurture
      3. continuous development
      4. discontinuous development {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      Developmental psychologists study human growth and development
      across three domains. Which of the following is *not* one of these
      domains?

      1. cognitive
      2. psychological
      3. physical
      4. psychosocial {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      How is lifespan development defined?

      1. The study of how we grow and change from conception to death.
      2. The study of how we grow and change in infancy and childhood.
      3. The study of physical, cognitive, and psychosocial growth in
         children.
      4. The study of emotions, personality, and social relationships.
         {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Describe the nature versus nurture controversy, and give an
      example of a trait and how it might be influenced by each?

   .. container::

      The nature versus nurture controversy seeks to understand whether
      our personalities and traits are the product of our genetic makeup
      and biological factors, or whether they are shaped by our
      environment, which includes such things as our parents, peers, and
      culture. Today, psychologists agree that both nature and nurture
      interact to shape who we become, but the debate over the relative
      contributions of each continues. An example would be a child
      learning to walk: Nature influences when the physical ability
      occurs, but culture can influence when a child masters this skill,
      as in Aché culture.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Compare and contrast continuous and discontinuous development.

   .. container::

      Continuous development sees our development as a cumulative
      process: Changes are gradual. On the other hand, discontinuous
      development sees our development as taking place in specific steps
      or stages: Changes are sudden.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Why should developmental milestones only be used as a general
      guideline for normal child development?

   .. container::

      Children develop at different rates. For example, some children
      may walk and talk as early as 8 months old, while others may not
      do so until well after their first birthday. Each child’s unique
      contexts will influence when he reaches these milestones.

Personal Application Questions
==============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      How are you different today from the person you were at 6 years
      old? What about at 16 years old? How are you the same as the
      person you were at those ages?

.. container::

   .. container::

      Your 3-year-old daughter is not yet potty trained. Based on what
      you know about the normative approach, should you be concerned?
      Why or why not?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   cognitive development
      domain of lifespan development that examines learning, attention,
      memory, language, thinking, reasoning, and creativity ^
   continuous development
      view that development is a cumulative process: gradually improving
      on existing skills ^
   developmental milestone
      approximate ages at which children reach specific normative events
      ^
   discontinuous development
      view that development takes place in unique stages, which happen
      at specific times or ages ^
   nature
      genes and biology ^
   normative approach
      study of development using norms, or average ages, when most
      children reach specific developmental milestones ^
   nurture
      environment and culture ^
   physical development
      domain of lifespan development that examines growth and changes in
      the body and brain, the senses, motor skills, and health and
      wellness ^
   psychosocial development
      domain of lifespan development that examines emotions,
      personality, and social relationships

.. |Continuous and Discontinuous development are shown side by side using two separate pictures. The first picture is a triangle labeled “Continuous Development” which slopes upward from Infancy to Adulthood in a straight line. The second picture is 4 bars side by side labeled “Discontinuous Development” which get higher from Infancy to Adulthood. These bars resemble a staircase.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_09_01_DevelopR.jpg
.. |Photograph A shows two children wearing inner tubes playing in the shallow water at the beach. Photograph B shows two children playing in the sand at a beach.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_09_01_Play.jpg
