============
Introduction
============



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

class=“introduction”

class=“summary” title=“Summary”

class=“review-questions” title=“Review Questions”

class=“critical-thinking” title=“Critical Thinking Questions”

class=“personal-application” title=“Personal Application Questions”

class=“references” title=“References”

|A photograph shows a crowd at the site of the Boston Marathon bombing
immediately after it occurred. Debris is scattered on the ground,
several people appear to be injured, and several people are helping
others.|\ {:}

What makes us behave as we do? What drives us to eat? What drives us
toward sex? Is there a biological basis to explain the feelings we
experience? How universal are emotions?

In this chapter, we will explore issues relating to both motivation and
emotion. We will begin with a discussion of several theories that have
been proposed to explain motivation and why we engage in a given
behavior. You will learn about the physiological needs that drive some
human behaviors, as well as the importance of our social experiences in
influencing our actions.

Next, we will consider both eating and having sex as examples of
motivated behaviors. What are the physiological mechanisms of hunger and
satiety? What understanding do scientists have of why obesity occurs,
and what treatments exist for obesity and eating disorders? How has
research into human sex and sexuality evolved over the past century? How
do psychologists understand and study the human experience of sexual
orientation and gender identity? These questions—and more—will be
explored.

This chapter will close with a discussion of emotion. You will learn
about several theories that have been proposed to explain how emotion
occurs, the biological underpinnings of emotion, and the universality of
emotions.

References
==========

Ahima, R. S., & Antwi, D. A. (2008). Brain regulation of appetite and
satiety. *Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics of North America, 37*,
811–823.

Allen, L. S., & Gorski, R. A. (1992). Sexual orientation and the size of
the anterior commissure in the human brain. *Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA, 89*, 7199–7202.

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). *Feeding and eating
disorders*. Retrieved from
http://www.dsm5.org/documents/eating%20disorders%20fact%20sheet.pdf

Arnold, H. J. (1976). Effects of performance feedback and extrinsic
reward upon high intrinsic motivation. *Organizational Behavior and
Human Performance, 17*, 275–288.

Bailey, M. J., & Pillard, R. C. (1991). A genetic study of male sexual
orientation. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 48*, 1089–1096.

Baldwin, J. D., & Baldwin, J. I. (1989). The socialization of
homosexuality and heterosexuality in a non-western society. *Archives of
Sexual Behavior, 18*, 13–29.

Bancroft, J. (2004). Alfred C. Kinsey and the politics of sex research.
*Annual Review of Sex Research, 15*, 1–39.

Bandura, A. (1994). Self-efficacy. In V. S. Ramachandran (Ed.),
Encyclopedia of human behavior (Vol. 4, pp. 71–81). New York, NY:
Academic Press.

Bauminger, N. (2002). The facilitation of social-emotional understanding
and social interaction in high-functioning children with autism:
Intervention outcomes. *Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
32*, 283–298.

Becker, J. B., Rudick, C. N., & Jenkins, W. J. (2001). The role of
dopamine in the nucleus accumbens and striatum during sexual behavior in
the female rat. *Journal of Neuroscience, 21*, 3236–3241.

Becker, J. M. (2012, April 25). Dr. Robert Spitzer apologizes to gay
community for infamous “ex-gay” study [Web log post]. Retrieved from
http://www.truthwinsout.org/news/2012/04/24542/

Beedie, C. J., Terry, P. C., Lane, A. M., & Devonport, T. J. (2011).
Differential assessment of emotions and moods: Development and
validation of the emotion and mood components of anxiety questionnaire.
*Personality and Individual Differences, 50*, 228–233.

Bell, A. P., Weinberg, M. S., & Hammersmith, S. K. (1981). *Sexual
preferences: Its development in men and women.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.

Berlyne, D. E. (1960). Toward a theory of exploratory behavior: II.
Arousal potential, perceptual curiosity, and learning. In (Series Ed.),
*Conflict, arousal, and curiosity* (pp. 193–227). New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill Book Company.

Bhasin, S., Enzlin, P., Coviello, A., & Basson, R. (2007). Sexual
dysfunction in men and women with endocrine disorders. *The Lancet,
369*, 597–611.

Blackford, J. U., & Pine, D. S. (2012). Neural substrates of childhood
anxiety disorders: A review of neuroimaging findings. *Child and
Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 21*, 501–525.

Bremner, J. D., & Vermetten, E. (2004). Neuroanatomical changes
associated with pharmacotherapy in posttraumatic stress disorder.
*Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1032*, 154–157.

Buck, R. (1980). Nonverbal behavior and the theory of emotion: The
facial feedback hypothesis. *Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology*, *38*, 811–824.

Bullough, V. L. (1998). Alfred Kinsey and the Kinsey report: Historical
overview and lasting contributions. *The Journal of Sex Research, 35*,
127–131.

Byne, W., Tobet, S., Mattiace, L. A., Lasco, M. S., Kemether, E., Edgar,
M. A., . . . Jones, L. B. (2001). The interstitial nuclei of the human
anterior hypothalamus: An investigation of variation with sex, sexual
orientation, and HIV status. *Hormones and Behavior, 40*, 86–92.

Cameron, J., & Pierce, W. D. (1994). Reinforcement, reward, and
intrinsic motivation: A meta-analysis. *Review of Educational Research,
64*, 363–423.

Carey, B. (2012, May 18). Psychiatry giant sorry for backing gay ‘cure.’
The New York Times. Retrieved from
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/19/health/dr-robert-l-spitzer-noted-psychiatrist-apologizes-for-study-on-gay-cure.html?\_r=0

Carter, C. S. (1992). Hormonal influences on human sexual behavior. In
J. B. Becker, S. M. Breedlove, & D. Crews (Eds.), Behavioral
Endocrinology (pp.131–142). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Cassidy, S. B., & Driscoll, D. J. (2009). Prader-Willi syndrome.
*European Journal of Human Genetics, 17*, 3–13.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2012). *Overweight and
obesity*. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/obesity/index.html

Chwalisz, K., Diener, E., & Gallagher, D. (1988). Autonomic arousal
feedback and emotional experience: Evidence from the spinal cord
injured. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54*, 820–828.

Colapinto, J. (2000). As nature made him: The boy who was raised as a
girl. New York, NY: Harper Collins.

Collier, D. A., & Treasure, J. L. (2004). The aetiology of eating
disorders. *The British Journal of Psychiatry, 185*, 363–365.

Conrad, P. (2005). The shifting engines of medicalization. *Journal of
Health and Social Behavior, 46*, 3–14.

Cunha, C., Monfils, M. H., & LeDoux, J. E. (2010). GABA(C) receptors in
the lateral amygdala: A possible novel target for the treatment of fear
and anxiety disorders? *Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 4*, 6.

Daniel, T. L., & Esser, J. K. (1980). Intrinsic motivation as influenced
by rewards, task interest, and task structure. *Journal of Applied
Psychology, 65*, 566–573.

Darwin, C. (1872). The expression of emotions in man and animals. New
York, NY: Appleton.

Davis, J. I., Senghas, A., & Ochsner, K. N. (2009). How does facial
feedback modulate emotional experience? *Journal of Research in
Personality, 43*, 822–829.

Deci, E. L. (1972). Intrinsic motivation, extrinsic reinforcement, and
inequity. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 22*, 113–120.

Deci, E. L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. M. (1999). A meta-analytic review
of experiments examining the effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic
motivation. *Psychological Bulletin, 125*, 627–668.

de Gelder, B. (2006). Towards the neurobiology of emotional body
language. *Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 7*, 242–249.

Drazen, D. L., & Woods, S. C. (2003). Peripheral signals in the control
of satiety and hunger. *Current Opinion in Clinical Nutrition and
Metabolic Care, 5*, 621–629.

Druce, M.R., Small, C.J., & Bloom, S.R. (2004). Minireview: Gut peptides
regulating satiety. *Endocrinology, 145*, 2660–2665.

Ekman, P., & Keltner, D. (1997). Universal facial expressions of
emotion: An old controversy and new findings. In U. Segerstråle & P.
Molnár (Eds.), Nonverbal communication: Where nature meets culture
(pp. 27–46). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Everett, B. J. (1990). Sexual motivation: A neural and behavioural
analysis of the mechanisms underlying appetitive and copulatory
responses of male rats. *Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 14*,
217–232.

Faris, E. (1921). Are instincts data or hypotheses? *American Journal of
Sociology, 27*, 184–196.

Femenía, T., Gómez-Galán, M., Lindskog, M., & Magara, S. (2012).
Dysfunctional hippocampal activity affects emotion and cognition in mood
disorders. *Brain Research, 1476*, 58–70.

Fossati, P. (2012). Neural correlates of emotion processing: From
emotional to social brain. *European Neuropsychopharmacology, 22*,
S487–S491.

Fournier, J. C., Keener, M. T., Almeida, J., Kronhaus, D. M., &
Phillips, M. L. (2013). Amygdala and whole-brain activity to emotional
faces distinguishes major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder.
Bipolar Disorders. Advance online publication. doi:10.1111/bdi.12106

Francis, N. H., & Kritsonis, W. A. (2006). A brief analysis of Abraham
Maslow’s original writing of *Self-Actualizing People: A Study of
Psychological Health*. *Doctoral Forum National Journal of Publishing
and Mentoring Doctoral Student Research, 3*, 1–7.

Gloy, V. L., Briel, M., Bhatt, D. L., Kashyap, S. R., Schauer, P. R.,
Mingrone, G., . . . Nordmann, A. J. (2013, October 22). Bariatric
surgery versus non-surgical treatment for obesity: A systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. *BMJ, 347*.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.f5934

Golan, O., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2006). Systemizing empathy: Teaching
adults with Asperger syndrome or high-functioning autism to recognize
complex emotions using interactive multimedia. *Development and
Psychopathology, 18*, 591–617.

Goosens, K. A., & Maren, S. (2002). Long-term potentiation as a
substrate for memory: Evidence from studies of amygdaloid plasticity and
Pavlovian fear conditioning. *Hippocampus, 12*, 592–599.

Graham, S., & Weiner, B. (1996). Theories and principles of motivation.
In D. C. Berliner & R. C. Calfee (Eds.), *Handbook of educational
psychology* (pp. 63–84). New York, NY: Routledge.

Greary, N. (1990). Pancreatic glucagon signals postprandial satiety.
*Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 14*, 323–328.

Guastella, A. J., Einfeld, S. L., Gray, K. M., Rinehart, N. J., Tonge,
B. J., Lambert, T. J., & Hickie, I. B. (2010). Intranasal oxytocin
improves emotion recognition for youth with autism spectrum disorders.
*Biological Psychiatry, 67*, 692–694.

Hall, J. A., & Kimura, D. (1994). Dermatoglyphic asymmetry and sexual
orientation in men. *Behavioral Neuroscience, 108*\ (6), 1203–1206.

Hamer, D. H., Hu. S., Magnuson, V. L., Hu, N., & Pattatucci, A. M.
(1993). A linkage between DNA markers on the X chromosome and male
sexual orientation. *Science, 261*, 321-327.

Havas, D. A., Glenberg, A. M., Gutowski, K. A., Lucarelli, M. J., &
Davidson, R. J. (2010). Cosmetic use of botulinum toxin-A affects
processing of emotional language. *Psychological Science*, *21*,
895–900.

Hobson, R. P. (1986). The autistic child’s appraisal of expressions of
emotion. *The Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 27*, 321–342.

Hock, R. R. (2008). Emotion and Motivation. In Forty studies that
changed psychology: Explorations into the history of psychological
research (6th ed.) (pp. 158–168). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.

Hu, S. H., Wei, N., Wang, Q. D., Yan, L. Q., Wei, E.Q., Zhang, M. M., .
. . Xu, Y. (2008). Patterns of brain activation during visually evoked
sexual arousal differ between homosexual and heterosexual men. *American
Journal of Neuroradiology, 29*, 1890–1896.

Human Rights Campaign. (n.d.). The lies and dangers of efforts to change
sexual orientation or gender identity. Retrieved from
http://www.hrc.org/resources/entry/the-lies-and-dangers-of-reparative-therapy

Jenkins, W. J. (2010). Can anyone tell me why I’m gay? What research
suggests regarding the origins of sexual orientation. *North American
Journal of Psychology, 12*, 279–296.

Jenkins, W. J., & Becker, J. B. (2001). Role of the striatum and nucleus
accumbens in paced copulatory behavior in the female rat. *Behavioural
Brain Research, 121*, 19–28.

Kinsey, A. C., Pomeroy, W. B., & Martin, C. E. (1948). *Sexual behavior
in the human male.* Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders Company.

Koltko-Rivera, M. E. (2006). Rediscovering the later version of Maslow’s
hierarchy of needs: Self-transcendence and opportunities for theory,
research, and unification. *Review of General Psychology, 10*, 302–317.

Konturek, S. J., Pepera, J., Zabielski, K., Konturek, P. C., Pawlick,
T., Szlachcic, A., & Hahn. (2003). Brain-gut axis in pancreatic
secretion and appetite control. *Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology,
54*, 293–317.

Lang, P. J. (1994). The varieties of emotional experience: A meditation
on James-Lange theory. *Psychological Review, 101*, 211–221.

Lazarus, R. S. (1991). *Emotion and adaptation*. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.

LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The Emotional Brain: The Mysterious Underpinnings
of Emotional Life. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.

LeDoux, J. E. (2002). *The synaptic self*. London, UK: Macmillan.

Leonard, G. (1982). The failure of self-actualization theory: A critique
of Carl Rogers and Abraham Maslow. *Journal of Humanistic Psychology,
22*, 56–73.

LeVay, S. (1991). A difference in the hypothalamic structure between
heterosexual and homosexual men. *Science, 253*, 1034–1037.

LeVay, S. (1996). *Queer science: The use and abuse of research into
homosexuality.* Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Levy-Gigi, E., Szabó, C., Kelemen, O., & Kéri, S. (2013). Association
among clinical response, hippocampal volume, and FKBP5 gene expression
in individuals with posttraumatic stress disorder receiving cognitive
behavioral therapy. *Biological Psychiatry, 74*, 793–800.

Lippa, R. A. (2003). Handedness, sexual orientation, and gender-related
personality traits in men and women. *Archives of Sexual Behavior, 32*,
103–114.

Loehlin, J. C., & McFadden, D. (2003). Otoacoustic emissions, auditory
evoked potentials, and traits related to sex and sexual orientation.
*Archives of Sexual Behavior, 32*, 115–127.

Macdonald, H., Rutter, M., Howlin, P., Rios, P., Conteur, A. L., Evered,
C., & Folstein, S. (1989). Recognition and expression of emotional cues
by autistic and normal adults. *Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 30*, 865–877.

Malatesta, C. Z., & Haviland, J. M. (1982). Learning display rules: The
socialization of emotion expression in infancy. *Child Development, 53*,
991–1003.

Maren, S., Phan, K. L., & Liberzon, I. (2013). The contextual brain:
Implications for fear conditioning, extinction and psychopathology.
*Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14*, 417–428.

Martin-Gronert, M. S., & Ozanne, S. E. (2013). Early life programming of
obesity. *Developmental Period Medicine, 17*, 7–12.

Maslow, A. H. (1943). A theory of human motivation. *Psychological
Review, 50*, 370–396.

Matsumoto, D. (1990). Cultural similarities and differences in display
rules. *Motivation and Emotion, 14*, 195–214.

Matsumoto, D., Yoo, S. H., & Nakagawa, S. (2008). Culture, emotion
regulation, and adjustment. *Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 94*, 925–937.

Mayo Clinic. (2012a). Anorexia nervosa. Retrieved from
http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/anorexia/DS00606

Mayo Clinic. (2012b). Bulimia nervosa. Retrieved from
http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/bulimia/DS00607

Mayo Clinic. (2013). Gastric bypass surgery. Retrieved from
http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/gastric-bypass/MY00825

McAdams, D. P., & Constantian, C. A. (1983). Intimacy and affiliation
motives in daily living: An experience sampling analysis. *Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 45*, 851–861.

McClelland, D. C., & Liberman, A. M. (1949). The effect of need for
achievement on recognition of need-related words. *Journal of
Personality, 18*, 236–251.

McFadden, D., & Champlin, C. A. (2000). Comparisons of auditory evoked
potentials in heterosexual, homosexual, and bisexual males and females.
*Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 1*, 89–99.

McFadden, D., & Pasanen, E. G. (1998). Comparisons of the auditory
systems of heterosexuals and homosexuals: Clicked-evoked otoacoustic
emissions. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 95*,
2709–2713.

McRae, K., Ochsner, K. N., Mauss, I. B., Gabrieli, J. J. D., & Gross, J.
J. (2008). Gender differences in emotion regulation: An fMRI study of
cognitive reappraisal. *Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 11*,
143–162.

Miguel-Hidalgo, J. J. (2013). Brain structural and functional changes in
adolescents with psychiatric disorders. *International Journal of
Adolescent Medicine and Health, 25*, 245–256.

Money, J. (1962). *Cytogenic and psychosexual incongruities with a note
on space-form blindness.* Paper presented at the 118th meeting of the
American Psychiatric Association, Toronto, Canada.

Money, J. (1975). Ablatio penis: Normal male infant sex-reassigned as a
girl. *Archives of Sexual Behavior, 4*, 65–71.

Moriceau, S., & Sullivan, R. M. (2006). Maternal presence serves as a
switch between learning fear and attraction in infancy. *Nature
Neuroscience, 9*, 1004–1006.

Murray, H. A., Barrett, W. G., Homburger, E., Langer, W. C., Mekeel, H.
S., Morgan, C. D., . . . Wolf, R. E. (1938). *Explorations in
personality: A clinical and experimental study of fifty men of college
age*. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Niemiec, C. P., & Ryan, R. M. (2009). Autonomy, competence, and
relatedness in the classroom: Applying self-determination theory to
educational practice. *Theory and Research in Education, 7*, 133–144.

Novin, D., Robinson, K., Culbreth, L. A., & Tordoff, M. G. (1985). Is
there a role for the liver in the control of food intake? *The American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 42*, 1050–1062.

O’Connell, S. (Writer/Producer). (2004). Dr. Money and the boy with no
penis. [Television documentary series episode]. In Horizon. London, UK:
BBC.

Paramaguru, K. (2013, November). Boy, girl, or intersex? Germany adjusts
to a third option at birth. Time. Retrieved from
http://world.time.com/2013/11/12/boy-girl-or-intersex/

Pessoa, L. (2010). Emotion and cognition and the amygdala: From “what is
it?” to “what’s to be done?” *Neuropsychologia, 48*, 3416–3429.

Pillard, R. C., & Bailey, M. J. (1995). A biologic perspective on sexual
orientation. *The Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 18*\ (1), 71–84.

Pillard, R. C., & Bailey, M. J. (1998). Sexual orientation has a
heritable component. *Human Biology, 70*, 347–365.

Ponseti, J., Bosinski, H. A., Wolff, S., Peller, M., Jansen, O.,
Mehdorn, H.M., . . . Siebner, H. R. (2006). A functional endophenotype
for sexual orientation in humans. *Neuroimage, 33*\ (3), 825–833.

Prader-Willi Syndrome Association. (2012). What is Prader-Willi
Syndrome? Retrieved from http://www.pwsausa.org/syndrome/index.htm

Qin, S., Young, C. B., Duan, X., Chen, T., Supekar, K., & Menon, V.
(2013). Amygdala subregional structure and intrinsic functional
connectivity predicts individual differences in anxiety during early
childhood. Biological Psychiatry. Advance online publication.
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.10.006

Rahman, Q., & Wilson, G. D. (2003a). Large sexual-orientation-related
differences in performance on mental rotation and judgment of line
orientation tasks. *Neuropsychology, 17*, 25–31.

Rahman, Q., & Wilson, G. D. (2003b). Sexual orientation and the 2nd to
4th finger length ratio: Evidence for organising effects of sex hormones
or developmental instability? *Psychoneuroendocrinology, 28*, 288–303.

Raineki, C., Cortés, M. R., Belnoue, L., & Sullivan, R. M. (2012).
Effects of early-life abuse differ across development: Infant social
behavior deficits are followed by adolescent depressive-like behaviors
mediated by the amygdala. *The Journal of Neuroscience, 32*, 7758–7765.

Rodriguez-Larralde, A., & Paradisi, I. (2009). Influence of genetic
factors on human sexual orientation. *Investigacion Clinica, 50*,
377–391.

Ross, M. W., & Arrindell, W. A. (1988). Perceived parental rearing
patterns of homosexual and heterosexual men. *The Journal of Sex
Research, 24*, 275–281.

Saxe, L., & Ben-Shakhar, G. (1999). Admissibility of polygraph tests:
The application of scientific standards post-Daubert. *Psychology,
Public Policy, and Law, 5*, 203–223.

Schachter, S., & Singer, J. E. (1962). Cognitive, social, and
physiological determinants of emotional state. *Psychological Review,
69*, 379–399.

Sherwin, B. B. (1988). A comparative analysis of the role of androgen in
human male and female sexual behavior: Behavioral specificity, critical
thresholds, and sensitivity. *Psychobiology, 16*, 416–425.

Smink, F. R. E., van Hoeken, D., & Hoek, H. W. (2012). Epidemiology of
eating disorders: Incidence, prevalence, and mortality rates. *Current
Psychiatry Reports, 14*, 406–414.

Soussignan, R. (2001). Duchenne smile, emotional experience, and
autonomic reactivity: A test of the facial feedback hypothesis.
*Emotion, 2*, 52–74.

Speakman, J. R., Levitsky, D. A., Allison, D. B., Bray, M. S., de
Castro, J. M., Clegg, D. J., . . . Westerterp-Plantenga, M. S. (2011).
Set points, settling points and some alternative models: Theoretical
options to understand how genes and environment combine to regulate body
adiposity. *Disease Models & Mechanisms, 4*, 733–745.

Strack, F., Martin, L. & Stepper, S. (1988). Inhibiting and facilitating
conditions of the human smile: A nonobtrusive test of the facial
feedback hypothesis. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology*,
*54*, 768–777.

Swaab, D. F., & Hofman, M. A. (1990). An enlarged suprachiasmatic
nucleus in homosexual men. *Brain Research, 537*, 141–148.

Tamietto, M., Castelli, L., Vighetti, S., Perozzo, P., Geminiani, G.,
Weiskrantz, L., & de Gelder, B. (2009). Unseen facial and bodily
expressions trigger fast emotional reactions. *Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences,USA, 106*, 17661–17666.

Tangmunkongvorakul, A., Banwell, C., Carmichael, G., Utomo, I. D., &
Sleigh, A. (2010). Sexual identities and lifestyles among
non-heterosexual urban Chiang Mai youth: Implications for health.
*Culture, Health, and Sexuality, 12*, 827–841.

Wang, Z., Neylan, T. C., Mueller, S. G., Lenoci, M., Truran, D., Marmar,
C. R., . . . Schuff, N. (2010). Magnetic resonance imaging of
hippocampal subfields in posttraumatic stress disorder. *Arch Gen
Psychiatry, 67*\ (3), 296–303. doi:10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2009.205

Weinsier, R. L., Nagy, T. R., Hunter, G. R., Darnell, B. E., Hensrud, D.
D., & Weiss, H. L. (2000). Do adaptive changes in metabolic rate favor
weight regain in weight-reduced individuals? An examination of the
set-point theory. *The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 72*,
1088–1094.

Woods, S. C. (2004). Gastrointestinal satiety signals I. An overview of
gastrointestinal signals that influence food intake. *American Journal
of Physiology: Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology, 286*, G7–G13.

Woods, S. C., & D’Alessio, D. A. (2008). Central control of body weight
and appetite. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 93*,
S37–S50.

Yerkes, R. M., & Dodson, J. D. (1908). The relation of strength of
stimulus to rapidity of habit-formation. *Journal of Comparative
Neurology and Psychology,* *18*, 459–482. doi:10.1002/cne.920180503

Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feeling and thinking: Preferences need no
inferences. *American Psychologist*, *35*\ (2), 151–175.

Zajonc, R. B. (1998). Emotions. In D. T. Gilbert & S. T. Fiske (Eds.),
Handbook of social psychology (4th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 591–632). New York,
NY: McGraw-Hill.

.. |A photograph shows a crowd at the site of the Boston Marathon bombing immediately after it occurred. Debris is scattered on the ground, several people appear to be injured, and several people are helping others.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_10_00_Marathon.jpg
