=======================================
Freud and the Psychodynamic Perspective
=======================================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Describe the
   assumptions of the psychodynamic perspective on personality
   development \* Define and describe the nature and function of the id,
   ego, and superego \* Define and describe the defense mechanisms \*
   Define and describe the psychosexual stages of personality
   development

Sigmund **Freud**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} (1856–1939) is
probably the most controversial and misunderstood psychological
theorist. When reading Freud’s theories, it is important to remember
that he was a medical doctor, not a psychologist. There was no such
thing as a degree in psychology at the time that he received his
education, which can help us understand some of the controversy over his
theories today. However, Freud was the first to systematically study and
theorize the workings of the unconscious mind in the manner that we
associate with modern psychology.

In the early years of his career, Freud worked with Josef Breuer, a
Viennese physician. During this time, Freud became intrigued by the
story of one of Breuer’s patients, Bertha Pappenheim, who was referred
to by the pseudonym Anna O. (Launer, 2005). Anna O. had been caring for
her dying father when she began to experience symptoms such as partial
paralysis, headaches, blurred vision, amnesia, and hallucinations
(Launer, 2005). In Freud’s day, these symptoms were commonly referred to
as hysteria. Anna O. turned to Breuer for help. He spent 2 years
(1880–1882) treating Anna O. and discovered that allowing her to talk
about her experiences seemed to bring some relief of her symptoms. Anna
O. called his treatment the “talking cure” (Launer, 2005). Despite the
fact the Freud never met Anna O., her story served as the basis for the
1895 book, *Studies on Hysteria*, which he co-authored with Breuer.
Based on Breuer’s description of Anna O.’s treatment, Freud concluded
that hysteria was the result of sexual abuse in childhood and that these
traumatic experiences had been hidden from consciousness. Breuer
disagreed with Freud, which soon ended their work together. However,
Freud continued to work to refine talk therapy and build his theory on
personality.

LEVELS OF CONSCIOUSNESS
=======================

To explain the concept of conscious versus unconscious experience, Freud
compared the mind to an iceberg (`[link] <#Figure_11_02_Iceberg>`__). He
said that only about one-tenth of our mind is **conscious**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, and the rest of our mind is **unconscious**\ {:
data-type=“term”}. Our unconscious refers to that mental activity of
which we are unaware and are unable to access (Freud, 1923). According
to Freud, unacceptable urges and desires are kept in our unconscious
through a process called repression. For example, we sometimes say
things that we don’t intend to say by unintentionally substituting
another word for the one we meant. You’ve probably heard of a Freudian
slip, the term used to describe this. Freud suggested that slips of the
tongue are actually sexual or aggressive urges, accidentally slipping
out of our unconscious. Speech errors such as this are quite common.
Seeing them as a reflection of unconscious desires, linguists today have
found that slips of the tongue tend to occur when we are tired, nervous,
or not at our optimal level of cognitive functioning (Motley, 2002).

|The mind’s conscious and unconscious states are illustrated as an
iceberg floating in water. Beneath the water’s surface in the
“unconscious” area are the id, ego, and superego. The area above the
water’s surface is labeled “conscious.” Most of the iceberg’s mass is
contained underwater.|\ {: #Figure_11_02_Iceberg}

According to Freud, our personality develops from a conflict between two
forces: our biological aggressive and pleasure-seeking drives versus our
internal (socialized) control over these drives. Our personality is the
result of our efforts to balance these two competing forces. Freud
suggested that we can understand this by imagining three interacting
systems within our minds. He called them the id, ego, and superego
(`[link] <#Figure_16_02_Superego>`__).

|A chart illustrates an exchange of the Id, Superego, and Ego. Each has
its own caption. The Id reads “I want to do that now,” and the Superego
reads “It’s not right to do that.” These two captions each have an arrow
pointing to the Ego’s caption which reads “Maybe we can
compromise.”|\ {: #Figure_16_02_Superego}

The unconscious **id**\ {: data-type=“term”} contains our most primitive
drives or urges, and is present from birth. It directs impulses for
hunger, thirst, and sex. Freud believed that the id operates on what he
called the “pleasure principle,” in which the id seeks immediate
gratification. Through social interactions with parents and others in a
child’s environment, the ego and superego develop to help control the
id. The **superego**\ {: data-type=“term”} develops as a child interacts
with others, learning the social rules for right and wrong. The superego
acts as our conscience; it is our moral compass that tells us how we
should behave. It strives for perfection and judges our behavior,
leading to feelings of pride or—when we fall short of the ideal—feelings
of guilt. In contrast to the instinctual id and the rule-based superego,
the **ego**\ {: data-type=“term”} is the rational part of our
personality. It’s what Freud considered to be the self, and it is the
part of our personality that is seen by others. Its job is to balance
the demands of the id and superego in the context of reality; thus, it
operates on what Freud called the “reality principle.” The ego helps the
id satisfy its desires in a realistic way.

The id and superego are in constant conflict, because the id wants
instant gratification regardless of the consequences, but the superego
tells us that we must behave in socially acceptable ways. Thus, the
ego’s job is to find the middle ground. It helps satisfy the id’s
desires in a rational way that will not lead us to feelings of guilt.
According to Freud, a person who has a strong ego, which can balance the
demands of the id and the superego, has a healthy personality. Freud
maintained that imbalances in the system can lead to **neurosis**\ {:
data-type=“term”} (a tendency to experience negative emotions), anxiety
disorders, or unhealthy behaviors. For example, a person who is
dominated by their id might be narcissistic and impulsive. A person with
a dominant superego might be controlled by feelings of guilt and deny
themselves even socially acceptable pleasures; conversely, if the
superego is weak or absent, a person might become a psychopath. An
overly dominant superego might be seen in an over-controlled individual
whose rational grasp on reality is so strong that they are unaware of
their emotional needs, or, in a neurotic who is overly defensive
(overusing ego defense mechanisms).

DEFENSE MECHANISMS
==================

Freud believed that feelings of anxiety result from the ego’s inability
to mediate the conflict between the id and superego. When this happens,
Freud believed that the ego seeks to restore balance through various
protective measures known as defense mechanisms
(`[link] <#Figure_11_02_Defense>`__). When certain events, feelings, or
yearnings cause an individual anxiety, the individual wishes to reduce
that anxiety. To do that, the individual’s unconscious mind uses ego
**defense mechanisms**\ {: data-type=“term”}, unconscious protective
behaviors that aim to reduce anxiety. The ego, usually conscious,
resorts to unconscious strivings to protect the ego from being
overwhelmed by anxiety. When we use defense mechanisms, we are unaware
that we are using them. Further, they operate in various ways that
distort reality. According to Freud, we all use ego defense mechanisms.

|A chart defines eight defense mechanisms and gives an example of each.
“Denial” is defined as “Refusing to accept real events because they are
unpleasant.” The example given is “Kaila refuses to admit she has an
alcohol problem although she is unable to go a single day without
drinking excessively.” “Displacement” is defined as “Transferring
inappropriate urges or behaviors onto a more acceptable or less
threatening target.” The example given is “During lunch at a restaurant,
Mark is angry at his older brother, but does not express it and instead
is verbally abusive to the server.” “Projection” is defined as
“Attributing unacceptable desires to others.” The example given is
“Chris often cheats on her boyfriend because she suspects he is already
cheating on her.” “Rationalization” is defined as “Justifying behaviors
by substituting acceptable reasons for less-acceptable real reasons.”
The example given is “Kim failed his history course because he did not
study or attend class, but he told his roommates that he failed because
the professor didn’t like him.” “Reaction Formation” is defined as
“Reducing anxiety by adopting beliefs contrary to your own beliefs.” The
example given is “Nadia is angry with her coworker Beth for always
arriving late to work after a night of partying, but she is nice and
agreeable to Beth and affirms the partying as cool.” “Regression” is
defined as “Returning to coping strategies for less mature stages of
development.” The example given is “After failing to pass his doctoral
examinations, Giorgio spends days in bed cuddling his favorite childhood
toy.” “Repression” is defined as “Supressing painful memories and
thoughts.” The example given is “LaShea cannot remember her
grandfather’s fatal heart attack, although she was present.”
“Sublimation” is defined as “Redirecting unacceptable desires through
socially acceptable channels.” The example given is “Jerome’s desire for
revenge on the drunk driver who killed his son is channeled into a
community support group for people who’ve lost loved ones to drunk
driving.”|\ {: #Figure_11_02_Defense}

While everyone uses defense mechanisms, Freud believed that overuse of
them may be problematic. For example, let’s say Joe Smith is a high
school football player. Deep down, Joe feels sexually attracted to
males. His conscious belief is that being gay is immoral and that if he
were gay, his family would disown him and he would be ostracized by his
peers. Therefore, there is a conflict between his conscious beliefs
(being gay is wrong and will result in being ostracized) and his
unconscious urges (attraction to males). The idea that he might be gay
causes Joe to have feelings of anxiety. How can he decrease his anxiety?
Joe may find himself acting very “macho,” making gay jokes, and picking
on a school peer who is gay. This way, Joe’s unconscious impulses are
further submerged.

There are several different types of defense mechanisms. For instance,
in repression, anxiety-causing memories from consciousness are blocked.
As an analogy, let’s say your car is making a strange noise, but because
you do not have the money to get it fixed, you just turn up the radio so
that you no longer hear the strange noise. Eventually you forget about
it. Similarly, in the human psyche, if a memory is too overwhelming to
deal with, it might be **repressed**\ {: data-type=“term”} and thus
removed from conscious awareness (Freud, 1920). This repressed memory
might cause symptoms in other areas.

Another defense mechanism is **reaction formation**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, in which someone expresses feelings, thoughts, and
behaviors opposite to their inclinations. In the above example, Joe made
fun of a homosexual peer while himself being attracted to males. In
**regression**\ {: data-type=“term”}, an individual acts much younger
than their age. For example, a four-year-old child who resents the
arrival of a newborn sibling may act like a baby and revert to drinking
out of a bottle. In **projection**\ {: data-type=“term”}, a person
refuses to acknowledge her own unconscious feelings and instead sees
those feelings in someone else. Other defense mechanisms include
**rationalization**\ {: data-type=“term”}, **displacement**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, and **sublimation**\ {: data-type=“term”}.

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Watch this `video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zWpZS0WqMWs>`__
   for a review of Freud’s defense mechanisms.

STAGES OF PSYCHOSEXUAL DEVELOPMENT
==================================

Freud believed that personality develops during early childhood:
Childhood experiences shape our personalities as well as our behavior as
adults. He asserted that we develop via a series of stages during
childhood. Each of us must pass through these childhood stages, and if
we do not have the proper nurturing and parenting during a stage, we
will be stuck, or fixated, in that stage, even as adults.

In each **psychosexual stage of development**\ {: data-type=“term”}, the
child’s pleasure-seeking urges, coming from the id, are focused on a
different area of the body, called an erogenous zone. The stages are
oral, anal, phallic, latency, and genital
(`[link] <#fs-idm172201728>`__).

Freud’s psychosexual development theory is quite controversial. To
understand the origins of the theory, it is helpful to be familiar with
the political, social, and cultural influences of Freud’s day in Vienna
at the turn of the 20th century. During this era, a climate of sexual
repression, combined with limited understanding and education
surrounding human sexuality, heavily influenced Freud’s perspective.
Given that sex was a taboo topic, Freud assumed that negative emotional
states (neuroses) stemmed from suppression of unconscious sexual and
aggressive urges. For Freud, his own recollections and interpretations
of patients’ experiences and dreams were sufficient proof that
psychosexual stages were universal events in early childhood.

.. raw:: html

   <table summary="A five column table outlines Freud’s stages of psychosexual development. From left to right the columns are labeled, “Stage, Age (years), Erogenous Zone, Major Conflict, and Adult Fixation Example.” The contents of the five rows are as follows. The first row contains “oral; 0–1; mouth; weaning off breast or bottle; and smoking, overeating.” The second row contains “anal; 1–3; anus; toilet training; and neatness, messiness.” The third row contains “phallic; 3–6; genitals; Oedipus/Electra complex; and vanity, overambition.” The fourth row contains “latency; 6–12; none; none; and none.” The fifth row contains “genital; 12+; genitals; none; and none.”">

.. raw:: html

   <caption>

Freud’s Stages of Psychosexual Development

.. raw:: html

   </caption>

.. raw:: html

   <thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Stage

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Age (years)

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Erogenous Zone

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Major Conflict

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Adult Fixation Example

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tbody>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Oral

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0–1

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Mouth

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Weaning off breast or bottle

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Smoking, overeating

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Anal

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1–3

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Anus

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Toilet training

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Neatness, messiness

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Phallic

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

3–6

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Genitals

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Oedipus/Electra complex

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Vanity, overambition

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Latency

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

6–12

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

None

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

None

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

None

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Genital

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

12+

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Genitals

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

None

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

None

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </tbody>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

Oral Stage
----------

In the **oral stage**\ {: data-type=“term”} (birth to 1 year), pleasure
is focused on the mouth. Eating and the pleasure derived from sucking
(nipples, pacifiers, and thumbs) play a large part in a baby’s first
year of life. At around 1 year of age, babies are weaned from the bottle
or breast, and this process can create conflict if not handled properly
by caregivers. According to Freud, an adult who smokes, drinks,
overeats, or bites her nails is fixated in the oral stage of her
psychosexual development; she may have been weaned too early or too
late, resulting in these fixation tendencies, all of which seek to ease
anxiety.

Anal Stage
----------

After passing through the oral stage, children enter what Freud termed
the **anal stage**\ {: data-type=“term”} (1–3 years). In this stage,
children experience pleasure in their bowel and bladder movements, so it
makes sense that the conflict in this stage is over toilet training.
Freud suggested that success at the anal stage depended on how parents
handled toilet training. Parents who offer praise and rewards encourage
positive results and can help children feel competent. Parents who are
harsh in toilet training can cause a child to become fixated at the anal
stage, leading to the development of an anal-retentive personality. The
anal-retentive personality is stingy and stubborn, has a compulsive need
for order and neatness, and might be considered a perfectionist. If
parents are too lenient in toilet training, the child might also become
fixated and display an anal-expulsive personality. The anal-expulsive
personality is messy, careless, disorganized, and prone to emotional
outbursts.

Phallic Stage
-------------

Freud’s third stage of psychosexual development is the **phallic
stage**\ {: data-type=“term”} (3–6 years), corresponding to the age when
children become aware of their bodies and recognize the differences
between boys and girls. The erogenous zone in this stage is the
genitals. Conflict arises when the child feels a desire for the
opposite-sex parent, and jealousy and hatred toward the same-sex parent.
For boys, this is called the Oedipus complex, involving a boy's desire
for his mother and his urge to replace his father who is seen as a rival
for the mother’s attention. At the same time, the boy is afraid his
father will punish him for his feelings, so he experiences *castration
anxiety*. The Oedipus complex is successfully resolved when the boy
begins to identify with his father as an indirect way to have the
mother. Failure to resolve the Oedipus complex may result in fixation
and development of a personality that might be described as vain and
overly ambitious.

Girls experience a comparable conflict in the phallic stage—the Electra
complex. The Electra complex, while often attributed to Freud, was
actually proposed by Freud’s protégé, Carl Jung (Jung & Kerenyi, 1963).
A girl desires the attention of her father and wishes to take her
mother’s place. Jung also said that girls are angry with the mother for
not providing them with a penis—hence the term *penis envy*. While Freud
initially embraced the Electra complex as a parallel to the Oedipus
complex, he later rejected it, yet it remains as a cornerstone of
Freudian theory, thanks in part to academics in the field (Freud,
1931/1968; Scott, 2005).

Latency Period
--------------

Following the phallic stage of psychosexual development is a period
known as the **latency period**\ {: data-type=“term”} (6 years to
puberty). This period is not considered a stage, because sexual feelings
are dormant as children focus on other pursuits, such as school,
friendships, hobbies, and sports. Children generally engage in
activities with peers of the same sex, which serves to consolidate a
child’s gender-role identity.

Genital Stage
-------------

The final stage is the **genital stage**\ {: data-type=“term”} (from
puberty on). In this stage, there is a sexual reawakening as the
incestuous urges resurface. The young person redirects these urges to
other, more socially acceptable partners (who often resemble the
other-sex parent). People in this stage have mature sexual interests,
which for Freud meant a strong desire for the opposite sex. Individuals
who successfully completed the previous stages, reaching the genital
stage with no fixations, are said to be well-balanced, healthy adults.

While most of Freud’s ideas have not found support in modern research,
we cannot discount the contributions that Freud has made to the field of
psychology. It was Freud who pointed out that a large part of our mental
life is influenced by the experiences of early childhood and takes place
outside of our conscious awareness; his theories paved the way for
others.

Summary
=======

Sigmund Freud presented the first comprehensive theory of personality.
He was also the first to recognize that much of our mental life takes
place outside of our conscious awareness. Freud also proposed three
components to our personality: the id, ego, and superego. The job of the
ego is to balance the sexual and aggressive drives of the id with the
moral ideal of the superego. Freud also said that personality develops
through a series of psychosexual stages. In each stage, pleasure focuses
on a specific erogenous zone. Failure to resolve a stage can lead one to
become fixated in that stage, leading to unhealthy personality traits.
Successful resolution of the stages leads to a healthy adult.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      The id operates on the \_______\_ principle.

      1. reality
      2. pleasure
      3. instant gratification
      4. guilt {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      The ego defense mechanism in which a person who is confronted with
      anxiety returns to a more immature behavioral stage is called
      \________.

      1. repression
      2. regression
      3. reaction formation
      4. rationalization {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      The Oedipus complex occurs in the \_______\_ stage of psychosexual
      development.

      1. oral
      2. anal
      3. phallic
      4. latency {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      How might the common expression “daddy’s girl” be rooted in the
      idea of the Electra complex?

   .. container::

      Since the idea behind the Electra complex is that the daughter
      competes with her same-sex parent for the attention of her
      opposite-sex parent, the term “daddy’s girl” might suggest that
      the daughter has an overly close relationship with her father and
      a more distant—or even antagonistic—relationship with her mother.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Describe the personality of someone who is fixated at the anal
      stage.

   .. container::

      If parents are too harsh during potty training, a person could
      become fixated at this stage and would be called anal retentive.
      The anal-retentive personality is stingy, stubborn, has a
      compulsive need for order and neatness, and might be considered a
      perfectionist. On the other hand, some parents may be too soft
      when it comes to potty training. In this case, Freud said that
      children could also become fixated and display an anal-expulsive
      personality. As an adult, an anal-expulsive personality is messy,
      careless, disorganized, and prone to emotional outbursts.

Personal Application Questions
==============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      What are some examples of defense mechanisms that you have used
      yourself or have witnessed others using?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   anal stage
      psychosexual stage in which children experience pleasure in their
      bowel and bladder movements ^
   conscious
      mental activity (thoughts, feelings, and memories) that we can
      access at any time ^
   defense mechanism
      unconscious protective behaviors designed to reduce ego anxiety ^
   displacement
      ego defense mechanism in which a person transfers inappropriate
      urges or behaviors toward a more acceptable or less threatening
      target ^
   ego
      aspect of personality that represents the self, or the part of
      one’s personality that is visible to others ^
   genital stage
      psychosexual stage in which the focus is on mature sexual
      interests ^
   id
      aspect of personality that consists of our most primitive drives
      or urges, including impulses for hunger, thirst, and sex ^
   latency period
      psychosexual stage in which sexual feelings are dormant ^
   neurosis
      tendency to experience negative emotions ^
   oral stage
      psychosexual stage in which an infant’s pleasure is focused on the
      mouth ^
   phallic stage
      psychosexual stage in which the focus is on the genitals ^
   projection
      ego defense mechanism in which a person confronted with anxiety
      disguises their unacceptable urges or behaviors by attributing
      them to other people ^
   psychosexual stages of development
      stages of child development in which a child’s pleasure-seeking
      urges are focused on specific areas of the body called erogenous
      zones ^
   rationalization
      ego defense mechanism in which a person confronted with anxiety
      makes excuses to justify behavior ^
   reaction formation
      ego defense mechanism in which a person confronted with anxiety
      swaps unacceptable urges or behaviors for their opposites ^
   regression
      ego defense mechanism in which a person confronted with anxiety
      returns to a more immature behavioral state ^
   repression
      ego defense mechanism in which anxiety-related thoughts and
      memories are kept in the unconscious ^
   sublimation
      ego defense mechanism in which unacceptable urges are channeled
      into more appropriate activities ^
   superego
      aspect of the personality that serves as one’s moral compass, or
      conscience ^
   unconscious
      mental activity of which we are unaware and unable to access

.. |The mind’s conscious and unconscious states are illustrated as an iceberg floating in water. Beneath the water’s surface in the “unconscious” area are the id, ego, and superego. The area above the water’s surface is labeled “conscious.” Most of the iceberg’s mass is contained underwater.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_11_02_Iceberg.jpg
.. |A chart illustrates an exchange of the Id, Superego, and Ego. Each has its own caption. The Id reads “I want to do that now,” and the Superego reads “It’s not right to do that.” These two captions each have an arrow pointing to the Ego’s caption which reads “Maybe we can compromise.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_11_02_Superego.jpg
.. |A chart defines eight defense mechanisms and gives an example of each. “Denial” is defined as “Refusing to accept real events because they are unpleasant.” The example given is “Kaila refuses to admit she has an alcohol problem although she is unable to go a single day without drinking excessively.” “Displacement” is defined as “Transferring inappropriate urges or behaviors onto a more acceptable or less threatening target.” The example given is “During lunch at a restaurant, Mark is angry at his older brother, but does not express it and instead is verbally abusive to the server.” “Projection” is defined as “Attributing unacceptable desires to others.” The example given is “Chris often cheats on her boyfriend because she suspects he is already cheating on her.” “Rationalization” is defined as “Justifying behaviors by substituting acceptable reasons for less-acceptable real reasons.” The example given is “Kim failed his history course because he did not study or attend class, but he told his roommates that he failed because the professor didn’t like him.” “Reaction Formation” is defined as “Reducing anxiety by adopting beliefs contrary to your own beliefs.” The example given is “Nadia is angry with her coworker Beth for always arriving late to work after a night of partying, but she is nice and agreeable to Beth and affirms the partying as cool.” “Regression” is defined as “Returning to coping strategies for less mature stages of development.” The example given is “After failing to pass his doctoral examinations, Giorgio spends days in bed cuddling his favorite childhood toy.” “Repression” is defined as “Supressing painful memories and thoughts.” The example given is “LaShea cannot remember her grandfather’s fatal heart attack, although she was present.” “Sublimation” is defined as “Redirecting unacceptable desires through socially acceptable channels.” The example given is “Jerome’s desire for revenge on the drunk driver who killed his son is channeled into a community support group for people who’ve lost loved ones to drunk driving.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_11_02_Defense.jpg
