===================
Learning Approaches
===================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Describe the
   behaviorist perspective on personality \* Describe the cognitive
   perspective on personality \* Describe the social cognitive
   perspective on personality

In contrast to the psychodynamic approaches of Freud and the
neo-Freudians, which relate personality to inner (and hidden) processes,
the learning approaches focus only on observable behavior. This
illustrates one significant advantage of the learning approaches over
psychodynamics: Because learning approaches involve observable,
measurable phenomena, they can be scientifically tested.

THE BEHAVIORAL PERSPECTIVE
==========================

Behaviorists do not believe in biological determinism: They do not see
personality traits as inborn. Instead, they view personality as
significantly shaped by the reinforcements and consequences outside of
the organism. In other words, people behave in a consistent manner based
on prior learning. B. F. **Skinner**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis},
a strict behaviorist, believed that environment was solely responsible
for all behavior, including the enduring, consistent behavior patterns
studied by personality theorists.

As you may recall from your study on the psychology of learning, Skinner
proposed that we demonstrate consistent behavior patterns because we
have developed certain response tendencies (Skinner, 1953). In other
words, we *learn* to behave in particular ways. We increase the
behaviors that lead to positive consequences, and we decrease the
behaviors that lead to negative consequences. Skinner disagreed with
Freud’s idea that personality is fixed in childhood. He argued that
personality develops over our entire life, not only in the first few
years. Our responses can change as we come across new situations;
therefore, we can expect more variability over time in personality than
Freud would anticipate. For example, consider a young woman, Greta, a
risk taker. She drives fast and participates in dangerous sports such as
hang gliding and kiteboarding. But after she gets married and has
children, the system of reinforcements and punishments in her
environment changes. Speeding and extreme sports are no longer
reinforced, so she no longer engages in those behaviors. In fact, Greta
now describes herself as a cautious person.

THE SOCIAL-COGNITIVE PERSPECTIVE
================================

Albert **Bandura**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} agreed with
Skinner that personality develops through **learning**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}. He disagreed, however, with Skinner’s
strict behaviorist approach to personality development, because he felt
that thinking and reasoning are important components of learning. He
presented a **social-cognitive theory**\ {: data-type=“term”} of
personality that emphasizes both learning and cognition as sources of
individual differences in personality. In social-cognitive theory, the
concepts of reciprocal determinism, observational learning, and
self-efficacy all play a part in personality development.

Reciprocal Determinism
----------------------

In contrast to Skinner’s idea that the environment alone determines
behavior, Bandura (1990) proposed the concept of **reciprocal
determinism**\ {: data-type=“term”}, in which cognitive processes,
behavior, and context all interact, each factor influencing and being
influenced by the others simultaneously
(`[link] <#Figure_11_04_RecipDeter>`__). Cognitive processes refer to
all characteristics previously learned, including beliefs, expectations,
and personality characteristics. *Behavior* refers to anything that we
do that may be rewarded or punished. Finally, the *context* in which the
behavior occurs refers to the environment or situation, which includes
rewarding/punishing stimuli.

|Three boxes are arranged in a triangle. There are lines with arrows on
each end connecting the boxes. The boxes are labeled “Behavior,”
“Situational factors,” and “Personal factors.”|\ {:
#Figure_11_04_RecipDeter}

Consider, for example, that you’re at a festival and one of the
attractions is bungee jumping from a bridge. Do you do it? In this
example, the behavior is bungee jumping. Cognitive factors that might
influence this behavior include your beliefs and values, and your past
experiences with similar behaviors. Finally, context refers to the
reward structure for the behavior. According to reciprocal determinism,
all of these factors are in play.

Observational Learning
----------------------

Bandura’s key contribution to learning theory was the idea that much
learning is vicarious. We learn by observing someone else’s behavior and
its consequences, which Bandura called observational learning. He felt
that this type of learning also plays a part in the development of our
personality. Just as we learn individual behaviors, we learn new
behavior patterns when we see them performed by other people or models.
Drawing on the behaviorists’ ideas about reinforcement, Bandura
suggested that whether we choose to imitate a model’s behavior depends
on whether we see the model reinforced or punished. Through
observational learning, we come to learn what behaviors are acceptable
and rewarded in our culture, and we also learn to inhibit deviant or
socially unacceptable behaviors by seeing what behaviors are punished.

We can see the principles of reciprocal determinism at work in
observational learning. For example, personal factors determine which
behaviors in the environment a person chooses to imitate, and those
environmental events in turn are processed cognitively according to
other personal factors.

Self-Efficacy
-------------

Bandura (1977, 1995) has studied a number of cognitive and personal
factors that affect learning and personality development, and most
recently has focused on the concept of self-efficacy.
**Self-efficacy**\ {: data-type=“term”} is our level of confidence in
our own abilities, developed through our social experiences.
Self-efficacy affects how we approach challenges and reach goals. In
observational learning, self-efficacy is a cognitive factor that affects
which behaviors we choose to imitate as well as our success in
performing those behaviors.

People who have high self-efficacy believe that their goals are within
reach, have a positive view of challenges seeing them as tasks to be
mastered, develop a deep interest in and strong commitment to the
activities in which they are involved, and quickly recover from
setbacks. Conversely, people with low self-efficacy avoid challenging
tasks because they doubt their ability to be successful, tend to focus
on failure and negative outcomes, and lose confidence in their abilities
if they experience setbacks. Feelings of self-efficacy can be specific
to certain situations. For instance, a student might feel confident in
her ability in English class but much less so in math class.

JULIAN ROTTER AND LOCUS OF CONTROL
==================================

Julian **Rotter**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} (1966) proposed the
concept of locus of control, another cognitive factor that affects
learning and personality development. Distinct from self-efficacy, which
involves our belief in our own abilities, **locus of control**\ {:
data-type=“term”} refers to our beliefs about the power we have over our
lives. In Rotter’s view, people possess either an internal or an
external locus of control (`[link] <#Figure_11_04_Control>`__). Those of
us with an internal locus of control (“internals”) tend to believe that
most of our outcomes are the direct result of our efforts. Those of us
with an external locus of control (“externals”) tend to believe that our
outcomes are outside of our control. Externals see their lives as being
controlled by other people, luck, or chance. For example, say you didn’t
spend much time studying for your psychology test and went out to dinner
with friends instead. When you receive your test score, you see that you
earned a D. If you possess an internal locus of control, you would most
likely admit that you failed because you didn’t spend enough time
studying and decide to study more for the next test. On the other hand,
if you possess an external locus of control, you might conclude that the
test was too hard and not bother studying for the next test, because you
figure you will fail it anyway. Researchers have found that people with
an internal locus of control perform better academically, achieve more
in their careers, are more independent, are healthier, are better able
to cope, and are less depressed than people who have an external locus
of control (Benassi, Sweeney, & Durfour, 1988; Lefcourt, 1982; Maltby,
Day, & Macaskill, 2007; Whyte, 1977, 1978, 1980).

|A box is labeled “Locus of Control.” An arrow points to the left from
this box to another labeled “Internal” containing “I am in control of
outcomes: belief that one’s effort and decisions determine outcomes.”
Another arrow points to the right from the “Locus of Control” box to
another box labeled “External” containing “Outcomes are beyond my
control: belief that luck, fate, and other people determine
outcomes.”|\ {: #Figure_11_04_Control}

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Take the `Locus of Control <http://openstax.org/l/locuscontrol>`__
   questionnaire. Scores range from 0 to 13. A low score on this
   questionnaire indicates an internal locus of control, and a high
   score indicates an external locus of control.

WALTER MISCHEL AND THE PERSON-SITUATION DEBATE
==============================================

Walter **Mischel**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} was a student of
Julian Rotter and taught for years at Stanford, where he was a colleague
of Albert Bandura. Mischel surveyed several decades of empirical
psychological literature regarding trait prediction of behavior, and his
conclusion shook the foundations of personality psychology. Mischel
found that the data did not support the central principle of the
field—that a person’s personality traits are consistent across
situations. His report triggered a decades-long period of
self-examination, known as the person-situation debate, among
personality psychologists.

Mischel suggested that perhaps we were looking for consistency in the
wrong places. He found that although behavior was inconsistent across
different situations, it was much more consistent within situations—so
that a person’s behavior in one situation would likely be repeated in a
similar one. And as you will see next regarding his famous “marshmallow
test,” Mischel also found that behavior is consistent in equivalent
situations across time.

One of Mischel’s most notable contributions to personality psychology
was his ideas on self-regulation. According to Lecci & Magnavita (2013),
“Self-regulation is the process of identifying a goal or set of goals
and, in pursuing these goals, using both internal (e.g., thoughts and
affect) and external (e.g., responses of anything or anyone in the
environment) feedback to maximize goal attainment” (p. 6.3).
Self-regulation is also known as will power. When we talk about will
power, we tend to think of it as the ability to delay gratification. For
example, Bettina’s teenage daughter made strawberry cupcakes, and they
looked delicious. However, Bettina forfeited the pleasure of eating one,
because she is training for a 5K race and wants to be fit and do well in
the race. Would you be able to resist getting a small reward now in
order to get a larger reward later? This is the question Mischel
investigated in his now-classic marshmallow test.

Mischel designed a study to assess self-regulation in young children. In
the marshmallow study, Mischel and his colleagues placed a preschool
child in a room with one marshmallow on the table. The child was told
that he could either eat the marshmallow now, or wait until the
researcher returned to the room and then he could have two marshmallows
(Mischel, Ebbesen & Raskoff, 1972). This was repeated with hundreds of
preschoolers. What Mischel and his team found was that young children
differ in their degree of self-control. Mischel and his colleagues
continued to follow this group of preschoolers through high school, and
what do you think they discovered? The children who had more
self-control in preschool (the ones who waited for the bigger reward)
were more successful in high school. They had higher SAT scores, had
positive peer relationships, and were less likely to have substance
abuse issues; as adults, they also had more stable marriages (Mischel,
Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989; Mischel et al., 2010). On the other hand,
those children who had poor self-control in preschool (the ones who
grabbed the one marshmallow) were not as successful in high school, and
they were found to have academic and behavioral problems.

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   To learn more about the marshmallow test and view the test given to
   children in Columbia, follow the link below to Joachim de Posada’s
   `TEDTalks <http://openstax.org/l/TEDPosada>`__ video.

Today, the debate is mostly resolved, and most psychologists consider
both the situation and personal factors in understanding behavior. For
Mischel (1993), people are situation processors. The children in the
marshmallow test each processed, or interpreted, the rewards structure
of that situation in their own way. Mischel’s approach to personality
stresses the importance of both the situation and the way the person
perceives the situation. Instead of behavior being determined by the
situation, people use cognitive processes to interpret the situation and
then behave in accordance with that interpretation.

Summary
=======

Behavioral theorists view personality as significantly shaped and
impacted by the reinforcements and consequences outside of the organism.
People behave in a consistent manner based on prior learning. B. F.
Skinner, a prominent behaviorist, said that we demonstrate consistent
behavior patterns, because we have developed certain response
tendencies. Mischel focused on how personal goals play a role in the
self-regulation process. Albert Bandura said that one’s environment can
determine behavior, but at the same time, people can influence the
environment with both their thoughts and behaviors, which is known as
reciprocal determinism. Bandura also emphasized how we learn from
watching others. He felt that this type of learning also plays a part in
the development of our personality. Bandura discussed the concept of
self-efficacy, which is our level of confidence in our own abilities.
Finally, Rotter proposed the concept of locus of control, which refers
to our beliefs about the power we have over our lives. He said that
people fall along a continuum between a purely internal and a purely
external locus of control.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Self-regulation is also known as \________.

      1. self-efficacy
      2. will power
      3. internal locus of control
      4. external locus of control {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      Your level of confidence in your own abilities is known as
      \________.

      1. self-efficacy
      2. self-concept
      3. self-control
      4. self-esteem {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      Jane believes that she got a bad grade on her psychology paper
      because her professor doesn’t like her. Jane most likely has an
      \______\_ locus of control.

      1. internal
      2. external
      3. intrinsic
      4. extrinsic {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Compare the personalities of someone who has high self-efficacy to
      someone who has low self-efficacy.

   .. container::

      People who have high self-efficacy believe that their efforts
      matter. They perceive their goals as being within reach; have a
      positive view of challenges, seeing them as tasks to be mastered;
      develop a deep interest in and strong commitment to the activities
      in which they are involved; and quickly recover from setbacks.
      Conversely, people with low self-efficacy believe their efforts
      have little or no effect, and that outcomes are beyond their
      control. They avoid challenging tasks because they doubt their
      abilities to be successful; tend to focus on failure and negative
      outcomes; and lose confidence in their abilities if they
      experience setbacks.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Compare and contrast Skinner’s perspective on personality
      development to Freud’s.

   .. container::

      Skinner disagreed with Freud’s idea that childhood plays an
      important role in shaping our personality. He argued that
      personality develops over our entire life, rather than in the
      first few years of life as Freud suggested. Skinner said that our
      responses can change as we come across new situations; therefore,
      we can see more variability over time in personality.

Personal Application Questions
==============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Do you have an internal or an external locus of control? Provide
      examples to support your answer.

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   locus of control
      beliefs about the power we have over our lives; an external locus
      of control is the belief that our outcomes are outside of our
      control; an internal locus of control is the belief that we
      control our own outcomes ^
   reciprocal determinism
      belief that one’s environment can determine behavior, but at the
      same time, people can influence the environment with both their
      thoughts and behaviors ^
   self-efficacy
      someone’s level of confidence in their own abilities ^
   social-cognitive theory
      Bandura’s theory of personality that emphasizes both cognition and
      learning as sources of individual differences in personality

.. |Three boxes are arranged in a triangle. There are lines with arrows on each end connecting the boxes. The boxes are labeled “Behavior,” “Situational factors,” and “Personal factors.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_11_04_RecipDeterR.jpg
.. |A box is labeled “Locus of Control.” An arrow points to the left from this box to another labeled “Internal” containing “I am in control of outcomes: belief that one’s effort and decisions determine outcomes.” Another arrow points to the right from the “Locus of Control” box to another box labeled “External” containing “Outcomes are beyond my control: belief that luck, fate, and other people determine outcomes.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_11_04_Control.jpg
