=============================================
Human Factors Psychology and Workplace Design
=============================================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Describe the
   field of human factors psychology \* Explain the role of human
   factors psychology in safety, productivity, and job satisfaction

Human factors psychology (or ergonomics, a term that is favored in
Europe) is the third subject area within industrial and organizational
psychology. This field is concerned with the integration of the
human-machine interface in the workplace, through design, and
specifically with researching and designing machines that fit human
requirements. The integration may be physical or cognitive, or a
combination of both. Anyone who needs to be convinced that the field is
necessary need only try to operate an unfamiliar television remote
control or use a new piece of software for the first time. Whereas the
two other areas of I-O psychology focus on the interface between the
worker and team, group, or organization, human factors psychology
focuses on the individual worker’s interaction with a machine, work
station, information displays, and the local environment, such as
lighting. In the United States, human factors psychology has origins in
both psychology and engineering; this is reflected in the early
contributions of Lillian **Gilbreth**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}
(psychologist and engineer) and her husband Frank Gilbreth (engineer).

Human factor professionals are involved in design from the beginning of
a project, as is more common in software design projects, or toward the
end in testing and evaluation, as is more common in traditional
industries (Howell, 2003). Another important role of human factor
professionals is in the development of regulations and principles of
best design. These regulations and principles are often related to work
safety. For example, the Three Mile Island nuclear accident lead to
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) requirements for additional
instrumentation in nuclear facilities to provide operators with more
critical information and increased operator training (United States
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2013). The American National Standards
Institute (ANSI, 2000), an independent developer of industrial
standards, develops many standards related to ergonomic design, such as
the design of control-center workstations that are used for
transportation control or industrial process control.

Many of the concerns of human factors psychology are related to
workplace safety. These concerns can be studied to help prevent
work-related injuries of individual workers or those around them. Safety
protocols may also be related to activities, such as commercial driving
or flying, medical procedures, and law enforcement, that have the
potential to impact the public.

One of the methods used to reduce accidents in the workplace is a
**checklist**\ {: data-type=“term”}. The airline industry is one
industry that uses checklists. Pilots are required to go through a
detailed checklist of the different parts of the aircraft before takeoff
to ensure that all essential equipment is working correctly. Astronauts
also go through checklists before takeoff. The surgical safety checklist
shown in `[link] <#CNX_Psych_13_04_Checklist>`__ was developed by the
World Health Organization (WHO) and serves as the basis for many
checklists at medical facilities.

|A checklist contains three sections, titled “Sign in,” “Time out,” and
“Sign out.” The section titled “Sign in” begins, “Before induction of
anesthesia, members of the team (at least the nurse and an anesthesia
professional) orally confirm that.” A bulleted list below this text
contains four items. The first list item reads, “The patient has
verified his or her identity, the surgical site and procedure, and
consent. The surgical site is marked or site marking is not
applicable. The pulse oximeter is on the patient and functioning.” The
second list item reads, “All members of the team are aware of whether
the patient has a known allergy.” The third list item reads, “The
patient’s airway and risk of aspiration have been evaluated and
appropriate equipment and assistance are available.” The fourth list
item reads, “If there is a risk of blood loss of at least 500 ml (or 7
ml/kg of body weight, in children), appropriate access and fluids are
available.” The section titled “Time out” begins, “Before skin incision,
the entire team (nurses, surgeons, anesthesia professionals, and any
others participating in the care of the patient) orally.” The bulleted
list below contains “Confirms that all team members have been introduced
by name and role. Confirms the patient’s identity, surgical site, and
procedure. Reviews the anticipated critical events.” This first bullet
has three sub-bullets that read, “Surgeon reviews critical and
unexpected steps, operative duration, and anticipated blood loss;
Anesthesia staff review concerns specific to the patient; Nursing staff
review confirmation of sterility, equipment availability, and other
concerns.” The following two bullets read: Confirms that prophylactic
antibiotics have been administered = 60 min before incision is made or
that antibiotics are not indicated” and “Confirms that all essential
imaging results for the correct patient are displayed in the operating
room.” The section titled “Sign out” reads “Before the patient leaves
the operating room.” Following this are two bullet points. The first
reads “Nurse reviews items aloud with the team.” This bullet has four
sub-bullets that read “Name of the procedure as recorded; That the
needle, sponge, and instrument counts are complete (or not applicable);
That the specimen (if any) is correctly labeled, including with the
patient’s name; Whether there are issues with equipment to be
addressed.” The final bullet reads “The surgeon, nurse, and anesthesia
professional review aloud the key concerns for the recovery and care of
the patient.”|\ {: #CNX_Psych_13_04_Checklist}

Safety concerns also lead to limits to how long an operator, such as a
pilot or truck driver, is allowed to operate the equipment. Recently the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) introduced limits for how long a
pilot is allowed to fly without an overnight break.

Howell (2003) outlines some important areas of research and practice in
the field of human factors. These are summarized in
`[link] <#Table_13_04_01>`__.

.. raw:: html

   <table id="Table_13_04_01" summary="A table composed of three columns and four rows is shown. The first row includes the following three headings: “Area,” “Description,” and “I-O Questions.” Descending from the first heading, “Area,” are the following: “Attention,” “Cognitive engineering,” “Task analysis,” and “Cognitive task analysis.” Descending from the second heading, “Description,” are the following: “Includes vigilance and monitoring, recognizing signals in noise, mental resources, and divided attention;” “Includes human software interactions in complex automated systems, especially the decision-making process of workers as they are supported by the software system;” “Breaking down the elements of a task;” and “Breaking down the elements of a cognitive task.” Descending from the third heading, “I-O Questions,” are the following: “How is attention maintained? What about tasks maintains attention? How to design systems to support attention?” “How do workers use and obtain information provided by software?” “How can a task be performed more efficiently?” “How can a task be performed more safely?” and “How are decisions made?”">

.. raw:: html

   <caption>

Areas of Study in Human Factors Psychology

.. raw:: html

   </caption>

.. raw:: html

   <thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Area

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Description

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

I-O Questions

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tbody>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Attention

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Includes vigilance and monitoring, recognizing signals in noise, mental
resources, and divided attention

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

How is attention maintained? What about tasks maintains attention? How
to design systems to support attention?

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Cognitive engineering

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Includes human software interactions in complex automated systems,
especially the decision-making processes of workers as they are
supported by the software system

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

How do workers use and obtain information provided by software?

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Task analysis

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Breaking down the elements of a task

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

How can a task be performed more efficiently? How can a task be
performed more safely?

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Cognitive task analysis

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Breaking down the elements of a cognitive task

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

How are decisions made?

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </tbody>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

As an example of research in human factors psychology Bruno & Abrahão
(2012) examined the impact of the volume of operator decisions on the
accuracy of decisions made within an information security center at a
banking institution in Brazil. The study examined a total of about
45,000 decisions made by 35 operators and 4 managers over a period of 60
days. Their study found that as the number of decisions made per day by
the operators climbed, that is, as their cognitive effort increased, the
operators made more mistakes in falsely identifying incidents as real
security breaches (when, in reality, they were not). Interestingly, the
opposite mistake of identifying real intrusions as false alarms did not
increase with increased cognitive demand. This appears to be good news
for the bank, since false alarms are not as costly as incorrectly
rejecting a genuine threat. These kinds of studies combine research on
attention, perception, teamwork, and human–computer interactions in a
field of considerable societal and business significance. This is
exactly the context of the events that led to the massive data breach
for Target in the fall of 2013. Indications are that security personnel
received signals of a security breach but did not interpret them
correctly, thus allowing the breach to continue for two weeks until an
outside agency, the FBI, informed the company (Riley, Elgin, Lawrence, &
Matlack, 2014).

Summary
=======

Human factors psychology, or ergonomics, studies the interface between
workers and their machines and physical environments. Human factors
psychologists specifically seek to design machines to better support the
workers using them. Psychologists may be involved in design of work
tools such as software, displays, or machines from the beginning of the
design process or during the testing an already developed product. Human
factor psychologists are also involved in the development of best design
recommendations and regulations. One important aspect of human factors
psychology is enhancing worker safety. Human factors research involves
efforts to understand and improve interactions between technology
systems and their human operators. Human–software interactions are a
large sector of this research.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      What aspect of an office workstation would a human factors
      psychologist be concerned about?

      1. height of the chair
      2. closeness to the supervisor
      3. frequency of coworker visits
      4. presence of an offensive sign {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      A human factors psychologist who studied how a worker interacted
      with a search engine would be researching in the area of
      \________.

      1. attention
      2. cognitive engineering
      3. job satisfaction
      4. management {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

Critical Thinking
=================

.. container::

   .. container::

      What role could a flight simulator play in the design of a new
      aircraft?

   .. container::

      Answers will vary, but they should include that the simulator
      would be used to determine how pilots interact with the controls
      and displays within the cockpit, including under conditions of
      simulated emergencies.

Personal Application
====================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Describe an example of a technology or team and technology
      interaction that you have had in the context of school or work
      that could have benefited from better design. What were the
      effects of the poor design? Make one suggestion for its
      improvement.

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   checklist
      method used to reduce workplace accidents

.. |A checklist contains three sections, titled “Sign in,” “Time out,” and “Sign out.” The section titled “Sign in” begins, “Before induction of anesthesia, members of the team (at least the nurse and an anesthesia professional) orally confirm that.” A bulleted list below this text contains four items. The first list item reads, “The patient has verified his or her identity, the surgical site and procedure, and consent. The surgical site is marked or site marking is not applicable. The pulse oximeter is on the patient and functioning.” The second list item reads, “All members of the team are aware of whether the patient has a known allergy.” The third list item reads, “The patient’s airway and risk of aspiration have been evaluated and appropriate equipment and assistance are available.” The fourth list item reads, “If there is a risk of blood loss of at least 500 ml (or 7 ml/kg of body weight, in children), appropriate access and fluids are available.” The section titled “Time out” begins, “Before skin incision, the entire team (nurses, surgeons, anesthesia professionals, and any others participating in the care of the patient) orally.” The bulleted list below contains “Confirms that all team members have been introduced by name and role. Confirms the patient’s identity, surgical site, and procedure. Reviews the anticipated critical events.” This first bullet has three sub-bullets that read, “Surgeon reviews critical and unexpected steps, operative duration, and anticipated blood loss; Anesthesia staff review concerns specific to the patient; Nursing staff review confirmation of sterility, equipment availability, and other concerns.” The following two bullets read: Confirms that prophylactic antibiotics have been administered = 60 min before incision is made or that antibiotics are not indicated” and “Confirms that all essential imaging results for the correct patient are displayed in the operating room.” The section titled “Sign out” reads “Before the patient leaves the operating room.” Following this are two bullet points. The first reads “Nurse reviews items aloud with the team.” This bullet has four sub-bullets that read “Name of the procedure as recorded; That the needle, sponge, and instrument counts are complete (or not applicable); That the specimen (if any) is correctly labeled, including with the patient’s name; Whether there are issues with equipment to be addressed.” The final bullet reads “The surgeon, nurse, and anesthesia professional review aloud the key concerns for the recovery and care of the patient.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_13_04_Checklist.jpg
