============
Introduction
============



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

class=“introduction”

class=“summary” title=“Summary”

class=“review-questions” title=“Review Questions”

class=“critical-thinking” title=“Critical Thinking Questions”

class=“personal-application” title=“Personal Application Questions”

class=“references” title=“References”

|Two photographs show people holding signs at public events in response
to Trayvon Martin’s death. The signs include words and messages such as,
“Justice,” “Wearing a hoodie is not a crime,” “Hoodies don’t kill
people; guns kill people,” and, “Do I look suspicious?”|\ {:}

Humans are diverse, and sometimes our differences make it challenging
for us to get along with one another. A poignant example is that of
Trayvon **Martin**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}, a 17-year-old
African American who was shot by a neighborhood watch volunteer, George
**Zimmerman**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}, in a predominantly
White neighborhood in 2012. Zimmerman grew suspicious of the boy dressed
in a hoodie and pursued Martin. A physical altercation ended with
Zimmerman fatally shooting Martin. Zimmerman claimed that he acted in
self-defense; Martin was unarmed. A Florida jury found Zimmerman not
guilty of second degree murder nor of manslaughter.

Several groups protested what they deemed racial profiling and brutality
against an unarmed Black male. Zimmerman, who has a Peruvian mother and
a German father, was accused of being racist. Some media coverage was
criticized for inflaming racial politics in their coverage. In spite of
conflicts such as these, people also to work together to create positive
change. For example, after the 9/11 terrorist attacks, people rallied
together and charitable donations skyrocket (Brown & Minty, 2006). This
chapter explores how the presence of other people influences the
behavior of individuals, dyads, and groups. Social factors can determine
whether human behavior tends toward conflict or harmony.

References
==========

Brown, P., & Minty, J. (2006, December 1). Media coverage and charitable
giving after the 2004 tsunami. Series Report 855. William Davidson
Institute, University of Michigan. Retrieved from
http://www.wdi.umich.edu/files/Publications/WorkingPapers/wp855.pdf.

.. _references-1:

References
==========

Adams, H. E., Wright, L. W., Jr., & Lohr, B.A. (1996). Is homophobia
associated with homosexual arousal? *Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
105*, 440–445.

Albarracín, D., & Wyer, R. S. (2001). Elaborative and nonelaborative
processing of a behavior-related communication. *Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 27*, 691–705.

Alexander, M. (2001, August 22). Thirty years later, Stanford prison
experiment lives on. *Stanford Report*. Retrieved from
http://news.stanford.edu/news/2001/august22/prison2-822.html.

Allport, G. W. (1954). *The Nature of Human Prejudice*. Cambridge, MA:
Addison-Wesley.

American Psychological Association (2010). Bullying: What parents,
teachers can do to stop it. Retrieved from
http://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/2010/04/bullying.aspx.

Aronson, E., & Mills, J. (1959). The effect of severity of initiation on
liking for a group, *Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 59*,
177–181.

Asch, S. E. (1955). Opinions and social pressure. *Scientific American,
193*, 31–35.

Baron, R. M., Albright, L., & Malloy, T. E. (1995). Effects of
behavioral and social class information on social judgment. *Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21*, 308–315.

Batson, C. D. (1991). *The altruism question: Toward a
social-psychological answer*. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Bandura, A. (1999). Moral disengagement in the perpetration of
inhumanities. *Personality and Social Psychology Review, 3*\ (3),
193–209. doi:10.1207/s15327957pspr0303\_3.

Berkowitz, A. D. (2004). *The social norms approach: Theory, research
and annotated bibliography.* Retrieved from
http://www.alanberkowitz.com/articles/social\_norms.pdf.

Berkowitz, L. (1993). *Aggression: Its causes, consequences, and
control*. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.

Betz, N. E. (2008). Women’s career development. In F. Denmark & M.
Paludi (Eds.), *Psychology of women: Handbook of issues and theories*
(2nd ed., pp. 717–752). Westport, CT: Praeger.

Blau, F. D., Ferber, M. A., & Winkler, A. E. (2010). *The economics of
women, men, and work* (6th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Bond, C. F., & Titus, L. J. (1983). Social facilitation: A meta-analysis
of 241 studies. *Psychological Bulletin, 94*, 265–292.

Bond, R., & Smith, P. B. (1996). Culture and conformity: A meta-analysis
of studies using Asch’s (1952b, 1956) line judgment task. *Psychological
Bulletin, 119*\ (1), 111–137.

Bowen, L. (2011). Bullying may contribute to lower test scores. *Monitor
on Psychology, 42*\ (9), 19.

Brown, R. (2010). *Prejudice: Its social psychology* (2nd ed.). Malden,
MA: Wiley-Blackwell.

Buss, D. M. (2004). *Evolutionary psychology: The new science of the
mind* (2nd ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.

Buss, D. M. (1989). Sex differences in human mate preferences:
Evolutionary hypotheses tested in 37 cultures. *Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 12*, 1–49.

Ceci, S. J., & Williams, W. M. (2011). Understanding current causes of
women’s underrepresentation in science. *Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 108*, 3157–3162.

Choi, I., & Nisbett R. E. (1998). Situational salience and cultural
differences in the correspondence bias and actor-observer bias.
*Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24*\ (9), 949–960.
doi:10.1177/0146167298249003.

Cialdini, R. B. (2001). Harnessing the science of persuasion. *Harvard
Business Review, 79*, 72–81.

Cialdini, R. B., Brown, S. L., Lewis, B. P., Luce, C., & Neuberg, S. L.
(1997). Reinterpreting the empathy-altruism relationship: When one into
one equals oneness. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73*,
481–494.

Colin Powell regrets Iraq war intelligence. (2011). Retrieved March 23,
2014, from
http://www.aljazeera.com/news/americas/2011/09/20119116916873488.html.

Cozby, P. C. (1973). Self-disclosure: A literature review.
*Psychological Bulletin, 79*, 73–91.

Crisp, R. J., & Turner, R. N. (2009). Can imagined interactions produce
positive perceptions? Reducing prejudice through simulated social
contact. *American Psychologist, 64*, 231–240.

Crowley, A. E., & Hoyer, W. D. (1994). An integrative framework for
understanding two-sided persuasion. *Journal of Consumer Research,
20*\ (4), 561–574.

Croyle, R. T., & Cooper, J. (1983). Dissonance arousal: Physiological
evidence. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45*, 782–791.

Cuddy, A. J., Norton, M. I., & Fiske, S. T. (2005). This old stereotype:
The pervasiveness and persistence of the elderly stereotype. *Journal of
Social Issues, 61*, 267–285.

Deutsch, M., & Gerard, H. (1955). A study of normative and informational
social influences upon individual judgment. *Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, 51*, 629–636.

Devine, P. G. (1989). Stereotypes and prejudice: Their automatic and
controlled components. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
56*, 5–18.

Devine, P. G., & Elliot, A. J. (1995). Are racial stereotypes really
fading? The Princeton trilogy revisited. *Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 21*, 1139–1150.

Dixon, T. L., & Linz D. (2000). Overrepresentation and
underrepresentation of African Americans and Latinos as lawbreakers on
television news. *Journal of Communication, 50*\ (2), 131–154.

Dodge, K. A., & Schwartz, D. (1997). Social information processing
mechanisms in aggressive behavior. In D. M. Stoff and J. Breiling
(Eds.), *Handbook of Antisocial Behavior* (pp. 171–180). Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley and Sons.

Dollard, J., Miller, N. E., Doob, L. W., Mowrer, O. H., & Sears, R. R.
(1939). *Frustration and aggression*. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.

Dovidio, J. F., & Gaertner, S. L. (2004). On the nature of contemporary
prejudice. In P. S. Rothenberg, (Ed.), *Race, class, and gender in the
United States: An integrated study* (6th ed., pp. 132–142). New York,
NY: Worth.

Dovidio, J. F., Gluszek, A., John, M. S., Ditlmann, R., & Lagunes, P.
(2010). Understanding bias toward Latinos: Discrimination, dimensions of
difference, and experience of exclusion. *Journal of Social Issues, 66*,
59–78.

Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (1975). An attribution analysis of the
effect of communicator characteristics on opinion change: The case of
communicator attractiveness. *Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 32*, 136–144.

Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (1993). *The psychology of attitudes*.
Orlando, FL: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College.

East Haven mayor suggests “he might have tacos” to repair relations with
Latinos. (2012). Retrieved April 27, 2014, from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PCUwtfqF4wU.

Ehrlinger, J., Gilovich, T., & Ross, L. (2005). Peering into the bias
blind spot: People's assessments of bias in themselves and others.
*Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31*, 680–692.

Festinger, L. (1957). *A theory of cognitive dissonance*. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.

Festinger, L., & Maccoby, N. (1964). On resistance to persuasive
communications. *The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 68*,
359–366.

Festinger, L., Schachler, S., & Back, K. W. (1950). *Social pressures in
informal groups: A study of human factors in housing*. New York, NY:
Harper.

Fink, B., Neave, N., Manning, J. T., & Grammer, K. (2006). Facial
symmetry and judgments of attractiveness, health and personality.
*Personality and Individual Differences, 41*, 491–499.

Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J., Glick, P., & Xu, J. (2002). A model of
(often mixed) stereotype content: Competence and warmth respectively
follow from perceived status and competition. *Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 82*\ (6), 878–902.

Fiske, S. T., Gilbert, D. T., & Lindzey, G. (2010). *Handbook of social
psychology* (5th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Freedman, J. L., & Fraser, S. C. (1966). Compliance without pressure:
The foot-in-the-door technique. *Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 4*, 195–202.

Geen, R. G. (1989). Alternative conceptions of social facilitation. In
P. B. Paulus (Ed.), *Psychology of group influence* (2nd ed.,
pp. 15–51). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Greenberg, J., Schimel, J., & Martens, A. (2002). Ageism: Denying the
face of the future. In T. D. Nelson (Ed.), *Ageism: Stereotyping and
prejudice against older persons* (pp. 27–48). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. L. (1998). Measuring
individual differences in implicit cognition: The implicit association
test. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74*, 1464–1480.

Greenwald, A. G., & Ronis, D. L. (1978). Twenty years of cognitive
dissonance: Case study of the evolution of a theory. *Psychological
Review, 85*, 53–57.

Grove, J. R., Hanrahan, S. J., & McInman, A. (1991). Success/failure
bias in attributions across involvement categories in sport.
*Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17*\ (1), 93–97.

Gupta, P. B., & Lord, K. R. (1998). Product placement in movies: The
effect of prominence and mode on recall. *Journal of Current Issues and
Research in Advertising, 20*, 47–59.

Hare, A. P. (2003). Roles, relationships, and groups in organizations:
Some conclusions and recommendations. *Small Group Research, 34*,
123–154.

Haugtvedt, C. P., & Wegener, D. T. (1994). Message order effects in
persuasion: An attitude strength perspective. *Journal of Consumer
Research, 21*, 205–218.

Hebl, M. R., Foster, J. B., Mannix, L. M., & Dovidio, J. F. (2002).
Formal and interpersonal discrimination: A field study of bias toward
homosexual applicants. *Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
28*\ (6), 815–825.

Heckert, T. M., Latier, A., Ringwald-Burton, A., & Drazen, C. (2006).
Relations among student effort, perceived class difficulty
appropriateness, and student evaluations of teaching: Is it possible to
"buy" better evaluations through lenient grading? *College Student
Journal, 40*\ (3), 588.

Herek, G. M., & McLemore, K. A. (2013). Sexual prejudice. *Annual Review
of Psychology, 64*, 309–33. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-113011-143826.

Heider, F. (1958). *The psychology of interpersonal relations*. New
York: Wiley.

Hinduja, S., & Patchin, J. W. (2010). Bullying, cyberbullying, and
suicide. *Archives of Suicide Research, 14*\ (3), 206–221.

Hinduja, S. & Patchin, J. W. (2011). Cyberbullying research summary:
Bullying, cyberbullying, and sexual orientation. Cyberbullying Research
Center. Retrieved April 27, 2014, from
http://www.cyberbullying.us/cyberbullying\_sexual\_orientation\_fact\_sheet.pdf.

Hodge, S. R., Burden, J. W., Jr., Robinson, L. E., & Bennett, R. A.,
III. (2008). Theorizing on the stereotyping of black male
student-athletes. *Journal for the Study of Sports and Athletes in
Education, 2*, 203–226.

Hoff, D. L., & Mitchell, S. N. (2009). Cyberbullying: Causes, effects,
and remedies. *Journal of Education, 47*, 652–665.

Hovland, C. I., Janis, I. L. and Kelley, H. H. (1953). *Communications
and persuasion: Psychological studies in opinion change.* New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.

Hovland, C.I., Weiss, W. (1951, Winter). The influence of source
credibility on communication effectiveness. *Public Opinion Quarterly,
15*\ (4), 635–650.

Igou, E. R., & Bless, H. (2003). Inferring the importance of arguments:
Order effects and conversational rules. *Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 39*, 91–99.

Ito, T. A., & Urland, G. R., (2003). Race and gender on the brain:
Electrocortical measures of attention to race and gender of multiply
categorizable individuals. *Journal of Personality & Social Psychology,
85*, 616–626.

Jackson, J. M., & Williams, K. D. (1985). Social loafing on difficult
tasks: Working collectively can improve performance. *Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 49*, 937–942.

Janis, I. L. (1972). *Victims of groupthink.* Boston, MA: Houghton
Mifflin.

Jones, E. E., & Nisbett, R. E. (1971). *The actor and the observer:
Divergent perceptions of the causes of behavior*. New York: General
Learning Press.

Jost, J. T., Banaji, M. R., & Nosek, B. A. (2004). A decade of system
justification theory: Accumulated evidence of conscious and unconscious
bolstering of the status quo. *Political Psychology, 25*, 881–919.

Jost, J. T., & Major, B. (Eds.). (2001). *The psychology of legitimacy:
Emerging perspectives on ideology, justice, and intergroup relations*.
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

Karau, S. J., & Williams, K. D. (1993). Social loafing: A meta-analytic
review and theoretical integration. *Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 65*, 681–706.

Krosnick, J. A., & Alwin, D. F. (1989). Aging and susceptibility to
attitude change. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57*,
416–425.

Kumkale, G. T., & Albarracín, D. (2004). The sleeper effect in
persuasion: A meta-analytic review. *Psychological Bulletin, 130*\ (1),
143–172. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.130.1.143.

Larsen, K. S. (1990). The Asch conformity experiment: Replication and
transhistorical comparisons. *Journal of Social Behavior & Personality,
5*\ (4), 163–168.

Latané, B., & Darley, J. M. (1968). Group inhibition of bystander
intervention in emergencies. *Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 10*, 215–221.

Latané, B., Williams, K. and Harkins, S. G. (1979). Many hands make
light the work: The causes and consequences of social loafing. *Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 37*, 822–832.

Laurenceau, J.-P., Barrett, L. F., & Pietromonaco, P. R. (1998).
Intimacy as an interpersonal process: The importance of self-disclosure,
partner disclosure, and perceived partner responsiveness in
interpersonal exchanges. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
74*\ (5), 1238–1251. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.74.5.1238.

Lerner, M. J., & Miller, D. T. (1978). Just world research and the
attribution process: Looking back and ahead. *Psychological Bulletin,
85*, 1030–1051.

Lumsdaine, A. A., & Janis, I. L. (1953). Resistance to
“counterpropaganda” produced by one-sided and two-sided “propaganda”
presentations. *Public Opinion Quarterly, 17*, 311–318.

Malle, B. F. (2006). The actor–observer asymmetry in attribution: A
(surprising) meta-analysis [Supplemental material]. *Psychological
Bulletin, 132*\ (6), 895–919. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.132.6.895.

Malloy, T. E., Albright, L., Kenny, D. A., Agatstein, F., & Winquist, L.
(1997). Interpersonal perception and metaperception in non-overlapping
social groups. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72*,
390–398.

Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications
for cognition, emotion, and motivation. *Psychological Review, 98*,
224–253.

Martin, C. H., & Bull, P. (2008). Obedience and conformity in clinical
practice. *British Journal of Midwifery, 16*\ (8), 504–509.

McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Cook, J. M. (2001). Birds of a
feather: Homophily in social networks. *Annual Review of Sociology, 27*,
pp. 415–444. doi:10.1146/annurev.soc.27.1.415.

Milgram, S. (1963). Behavioral study of obedience. *Journal of Abnormal
and Social Psychology, 67*, 371–378.

Milgram, S. (1965). Some conditions of obedience and disobedience to
authority. *Human Relations, 18*, 57–76.

Miller, D. T., & Ross, M. (1975). Self-serving biases in the attribution
of causality: Fact or fiction? *Psychological Bulletin, 82*, 213–225.

Miller, N., & Campbell, D. T. (1959). Recency and primacy in persuasion
as a function of the timing of speeches and measurements. *The Journal
of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 59*, 1–9.

Mischel, W. (1977). The interaction of person and situation.
*Personality at the crossroads: Current issues in interactional
psychology*, *333*, 352.

Mitchell, D. H., & Eckstein, D. (2009). Jury dynamics and
decision-making: A prescription for groupthink. *International Journal
of Academic Research, 1*\ (1), 163–169.

Nelson, T. (Ed.). (2004). *Ageism: Stereotyping and prejudice against
older persons*. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Nisbett, R. E., Caputo, C., Legant, P., & Marecek, J. (1973). Behavior
as seen by the actor and as seen by the observer. *Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 27*, 154–164.

Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A. (2001). Culture and
systems of thought: Holistic versus analytic cognition. *Psychological
Review, 108*, 291–310.

Nosek, B. A. (2005). Moderators of the relationship between implicit and
explicit evaluation. *Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
134*\ (4), 565–584.

O'Keeffe, G. S., & Clarke-Pearson, K. (2011). The impact of social media
on children, adolescents, and families. *Pediatrics, (127)*\ 4, 800–4.
doi:10.1542/peds.2011-0054.

Olson, M. A., & Fazio, R. H. (2003). Relations between implicit measures
of prejudice what are we measuring? *Psychological Science, 14*,
636–639.

Olweus, D. (1993). *Bullying at school: What we know and what we can
do*. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.

Penton-Voak, I. S., Jones, B. C., Little, A. C., Baker, S., Tiddeman,
B., Burt, D. M., & Perrett, D. I. (2001). Symmetry, sexual dimorphism in
facial proportions and male facial attractiveness. *Proceedings of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 268*, 1617–1623.

Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The elaboration likelihood model
of persuasion. In *Communication and persuasion: Central and peripheral
routes to attitude change* (pp. 1–24). New York, NY: Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-4964-1.

Petty, R. E., Wegener, D. T., & Fabrigar, L. R. (1997). Attitudes and
attitude change. *Annual Review of Psychology, 48*, 609–647.

Pliner, P., Hart, H., Kohl, J., & Saari, D. (1974). Compliance without
pressure: Some further data on the foot-in-the-door technique. *Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 10*, 17–22.

Plant, E. A., & Devine, P. G. (1998). Internal and external motivation
to respond without prejudice. *Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75*, 811–832.

Regan, P. C., & Berscheid, E. (1997). Gender differences in
characteristics desired in a potential sexual and marriage partner.
*Journal of Psychology & Human Sexuality, 9*, 25–37.

Rhodes, N., & Wood, W. (1992). Self-esteem and intelligence affect
influenceability: The mediating role of message reception.
*Psychological Bulletin, 111*, 156–171.

Richard, F. D., Bond, C. F., Jr., & Stokes-Zoota, J. J. (2003). One
hundred years of social psychology quantitatively described. *Review of
General Psychology, 7*\ (4), 331–363. doi:10.1037/1089-2680.7.4.331.

Riggio, H. R., & Garcia, A. L. (2009). The power of situations:
Jonestown and the fundamental attribution error. *Teaching of
Psychology, 36*\ (2), 108–112. doi:10.1080/00986280902739636.

Rikowski, A., & Grammer, K. (1999). Human body odour, symmetry and
attractiveness. *Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 266*\ (1422), 869–874. doi:10.1098/rspb.1999.0717.

Roesch, S. C., & Amirkham, J. H. (1997). Boundary conditions for
self-serving attributions: Another look at the sports pages. *Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 27*, 245–261.

Rojek, J., Rosenfeld, R., & Decker, S. (2012). Policing race: The racial
stratification of searches in police traffic stops. *Criminology, 50*,
993–1024.

Rosenberg, M. J., & Hovland, C. I. (1960). Cognitive, affective and
behavioral components of attitudes. In *Attitude organization and
change: An analysis of consistency among attitude components*
(pp. 1–14). New Haven and London: Yale University Press.

Rosenthal, R., & Jacobson, L. F. (1968). Teacher expectations for the
disadvantaged. *Scientific American, 218*, 19–23.

Ross, L. (1977). The intuitive psychologist and his shortcomings:
Distortions in the attribution process. *Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, 10*, 173–220.

Ross, L., Amabile, T. M., & Steinmetz, J. L. (1977). Social roles,
social control, and biases in social-perception processes. *Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 35*, 485–494.

Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). *The person and the situation:
Perspectives of social psychology*. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.

Rudman, L. A. (1998). Self-promotion as a risk factor for women: The
costs and benefits of counterstereotypical impression management.
*Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74*\ (3), 629–645.

Rusbult, C. E., & Van Lange, P. A. (2003). Interdependence, interaction,
and relationships. *Annual Review of Psychology, 54*, 351–575.

Schank, R. C., Abelson, R. (1977). *Scripts, plans, goals, and
understanding: An inquiry into human knowledge.* Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

Shepperd, J. A., & Taylor, K. M. (1999). Social loafing and
expectancy-value theory. *Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
25*, 1147–1158.

Singh, D. (1993). Adaptive significance of female physical
attractiveness: Role of waist-to-hip ratio. *Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 65*, 293–307.

Sommers, S. R., & Ellsworth, P. C. (2000). Race in the courtroom:
Perceptions of guilt and dispositional attributions. *Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 26*, 1367–1379.

Spears, B., Slee, P., Owens, L., & Johnson, B. (2009). Behind the scenes
and screens: Insights into the human dimension of covert and
cyberbullying. *Journal of Psychology, 217*\ (4), 189–196.
doi:10.1027/0044-3409.217.4.189.

Sternberg, R. J. (1986). A triangular theory of love. *Psychological
Review, 93*, 119–135.

Stewart, J. B. (2002). *Heart of a soldier*. New York, NY: Simon and
Schuster.

Sutton, R.M. and Douglas, K.M. (2005). Justice for all, or just for me?
More support for self-other differences in just world beliefs.
Personality and Individual Differences, 9(3). pp. 637-645. ISSN
0191-8869.

Tajfel, H. (1974). Social identity and intergroup behaviour. *Social
Science Information, 13*\ (2), 65–93.

Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup
conflict. In W. G. Austin & S. Worchel (Eds.), *The social psychology of
intergroup relations* (pp. 33–48). Monterey, CA: Brooks-Cole.

Tavris, C., & Aronson, E. (2008). *Mistakes were made (but not by me):
Why we justify foolish beliefs, bad decisions, and hurtful acts*. New
York, NY: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

Taylor, L. S., Fiore, A. T., Mendelsohn, G. A., & Cheshire, C. (2011).
“Out of my league”: A real-world test of the matching hypothesis.
*Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 37*\ (7), 942–954.
doi:10.1177/0146167211409947.

Teger, A. I., & Pruitt, D. G. (1967). Components of group risk taking.
*Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 3*, 189–205.

Triandis, H. C. (2001). Individualism-collectivism and personality.
*Journal of Personality, 69*, 907–924.

van Veen, V., Krug, M. K., Schooler, J. W., & Carter, C. S. (2009).
Neural activity predicts attitude change in cognitive dissonance.
*Nature Neuroscience, 12*, 1469–1474.

Vandebosch, H., & Van Cleemput, K. (2009). Cyberbullying among
youngsters: Profiles of bullies and victims. *New media & Society,
11*\ (8), 1349–1371. doi:10.1177/1461444809341263.

Walker, M. B., & Andrade, M. G. (1996). Conformity in the Asch task as a
function of age. *The Journal of Social Psychology, 136*, 367–372.

Walster, E., & Festinger, L. (1962). The effectiveness of “overheard”
persuasive communications. *Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
65*, 395–402.

Wason, P. C., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1972). *The psychology of
deduction: Structure and content*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Weiner, B. (1979). A theory of motivation for some classroom
experiences. *Journal of Educational Psychology, 71*\ (1), 3–25.

Wilson, M., & Daly, M. (1985). Competitiveness, risk taking, and
violence: The young male syndrome. *Ethology and Sociobiology, 6*,
59–73.

Wilson, T. D., Lindsey, S., & Schooler, T. Y. (2000). A model of dual
attitudes. *Psychological Review, 107*, 101–126.

Zajonc, R. B. (1965). Social facilitation. *Science, 149*\ (3681),
269–274. doi:10.1126/science.149.3681.269

Zimbardo, P. G. (2013). An end to the experiment [Slide show of the
Stanford prison experiment]. Retrieved from
http://www.prisonexp.org/psychology/37.

.. |Two photographs show people holding signs at public events in response to Trayvon Martin’s death. The signs include words and messages such as, “Justice,” “Wearing a hoodie is not a crime,” “Hoodies don’t kill people; guns kill people,” and, “Do I look suspicious?”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_12_00_Trayvon.jpg
