============
Introduction
============



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

class=“introduction”

class=“summary” title=“Summary”

class=“review-questions” title=“Review Questions”

class=“critical-thinking” title=“Critical Thinking Questions”

class=“personal-application” title=“Personal Application Questions”

class=“references” title=“References”

|A collage of three color photographs is shown. From left to right
appear a person in front of a laptop computer sitting outdoors, a person
sitting on the floor with a laptop, and a person sitting on the couch
with a small child and a laptop.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_13_00_IOPsych}

In July 2012, Yahoo!, one of the largest and oldest web companies,
announced the appointment of Marissa Mayer as CEO. Yahoo! had struggled
to define itself and excel in the industry for several years, and the
appointment of Mayer, a top Google executive, made big news. Among her
many decisions, in February 2013, Mayer announced that employees would
no longer be allowed to telecommute. Telecommuting is representative of
many management innovations that have been made in recent years, largely
by tech companies. Telecommuting reflects a belief on the part of
companies that employees are responsible, self-motivating, and perhaps
work best when they are left alone. It also has an impact on work–family
balance, though which way is yet unclear. And telecommuting reflects the
more general trend of increasing overlap between workers’ time spent *on
the job* and time spent *off the job*.

The reversal of this policy at Yahoo! brought controversy and a lot of
questions about what it meant. Mayer has stayed largely quiet on her
reasoning behind the decision, except to say that it was meant to better
the company. She finally addressed her decision briefly at the 2013
Great Place to Work conference (Tkaczyk, 2013) by saying, among other
things, that while “people are more productive when they're alone,
they're more collaborative and innovative when they're together.”
Interestingly, shortly after the Yahoo! change, consumer electronics
retailer Best Buy also eliminated telecommuting as an option for their
employees. Will the change make Yahoo! more innovative or more
productive? How has the change affected employees at the company,
particularly working parents and those taking care of elderly relatives?
Was the change introduced in the most effective way? These are questions
that are commonly studied by a branch of psychology called industrial
and organizational psychology.

References
==========

ABC News. (2000, September 8). *Court OKs barring high IQs for Cops*.
Retreived from
http://abcnews.go.com/US/court-oks-barring-high-iqs-cops/story?id=95836

Agerström, J., & Rooth, D.-O. (2011). The role of automatic obesity
stereotypes in real hiring discrimination. *Journal of Applied
Psychology, 96*, 790–805.

Allen, T. D., Eby, L. T., Poteet, M. L., Lentz, E., & Lima, L. (2004).
Career benefits associated with mentoring for protégés: A
meta-analysis\ *. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89*, 127–136.

Allen, T. D., Lentz, E., & Day, R. (2006). Career success outcomes
associated with mentoring others: A comparison of mentors and
nonmentors. *Journal of Career Development, 32*, 272–285.

American Civil Liberties Union. (n.d.). *Non-Discrimination Laws: State
by State Information—Map*. Retrieved from
https://www.aclu.org/maps/non-discrimination-laws-state-state-information-map

American National Standards Institute. (2000). *Control center ergonomic
standards*. Retrieved from
http://webstore.ansi.org/ergonomics/control\_centre\_ergonomics.aspx

Amiot, C. E., Terry, D. J., Jimmieson, N. L., & Callan, V. J. (2006). A
longitudinal investigation of coping processes during a merger:
Implications for job satisfaction and organizational identification.
*Journal of Management, 32*, 552–574.

Arthur, W., Bennett, W., Edens, P. S., & Bell, S. T. (2003).
Effectiveness of training in organizations: A meta-analysis of design
and evaluation features. *Journal of Applied Psychology,* *88*, 234–245.

Arthur, W., Woehr, D. J., & Graziano, W. G. (2001). Personality testing
in employment settings: Problems and issues in the application of
typical selection practices. *Personnel Review,* *30*, 657–676.

Atkins, P. W. B., & Wood, R. E. (2002). Self-versus others’ ratings as
predictors of assessment center ratings: Validation evidence for
360-degree feedback programs. *Personnel Psychology, 55*, 871–904.

Badgett, M. V. L., Sears, B., Lau, H., & Ho, D. (2009). Bias in the
workplace: Consistent evidence of sexual orientation and gender identity
discrimination 1998–2008. *Chicago-Kent Law Review,* *84*, 559–595.

Barrick, M. R., Swider, B. W., & Stewart, G. L. (2010). Initial
evaluations in the interview: Relationships with subsequent interviewer
evaluations and employment offers. *Journal of Applied Psychology, 95*,
1163–1172.

Bass, B. M. (1985). *Leadership and performance beyond expectations*.
New York, NY: Free Press.

Bass, B. M., Avolio, B. J., & Atwater, L. (1996). The transformational
and transactional leadership of men and women. *Applied Psychology: An
International Review, 45*, 5–34.

Bruno, T., & Abrahão, J. (2012). False alarms and incorrect rejections
in an information security center: Correlation with the frequency of
incidents. *Work, 41*, 2902–2907.

Buckingham, M., & Clifton, D. O. (2001). *Now, discover your strengths*.
New York, NY: Free Press.

Bureau of Labor Statistics—U.S. Department of Labor. (2013). American
Time Use Survey—2013 Results [Press release: USDL-14-1137]. Available at
http://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/atus.pdf

Bye, H. H., Horverak, J. G., Sandal, G. M., Sam, D. L., & Vijver, F. J.
R. van de (2014). Cultural fit and ethnic background in the job
interview. *International Journal of Cross Cultural Management, 14*,
7–26.

Carlson, D. S., Kacmar, K. M., & Williams, L. J. (2000). Construction
and initial validation of a multidimensional measure of work–family
conflict. *Journal of Vocational Behavior, 56*, 249–276.

Colligan, T. W., & Higgins, E. M. (2005). Workplace stress: Etiology and
consequences. *Journal of Workplace Behavioral Health, 21*, 89–97.

Corbett, C., & Hill, C. (2012) *Graduating to a pay gap: The earnings of
women and men one year after college graduation*. Washington, DC:
American Association of University Women.

DeGroot, T., & Gooty, J. (2009). Can nonverbal cues be used to make
meaningful personality attributions in employment interviews? *Journal
of Business Psychology, 24*, 179–192.

DeNisi, A. S., & Kluger, A. N. (2000). Feedback effectiveness: Can
360-degree appraisals be improved? *Academy of Management Executive,
14*, 129–139.

Dierdorff, E. C., & Wilson, M. A. (2003). A meta-analysis of job
analysis reliability. *Journal of Applied Psychology, 88*, 635–646.

Eagly, A. H., Johannesen-Schmidt, M. C., & van Engen, M. L. (2003).
Transformational, transactional, and laissez-faire leadership styles: A
meta-analysis comparing women and men. *Psychological Bulletin, 129*,
569–591.

Eagly, A. H., & Johnson, B. T. (1990). Gender and leadership style: A
meta-analysis. *Psychological Bulletin, 108*, 233–256.

Eby, L. T., Allen, T. D., Evans, S. C., Ng, T., & DuBois, D. (2008).
Does mentoring matter? A multidisciplinary meta-analysis comparing
mentored and non-mentored individuals. *Journal of Vocational Behavior,
72*, 254–267.

Eby, L. T., Durley, J. R., Evans, S. C., & Ragins, B. R. (2006). The
relationship between short-term mentoring benefits and long-term mentor
outcomes. *Journal of Vocational Behavior, 69*, 424–444.

Elmore, L. (2010, June). The workplace generation gaps. *Women in
Business, 62*\ (2), 8–11.

Fletcher, C. (2001). Performance appraisal and management: The
developing research agenda. *Journal of Occupational and Organizational
Psychology, 74*, 473–487.

Gentry, W. A., Weber, T. J., & Sadri, G. (2008). Examining
career-related mentoring and managerial performance across cultures: A
multilevel analysis. *Journal of Vocational Behavior, 72*, 241–253.

Gibson, J. W., Greenwood, R. A., & Murphy, E. F. (2009). Generational
differences in the workplace: Personal values, behaviors, and popular
beliefs. *Journal of Diversity Management, 4*, 1–7.

Gilbreth, L. M. (1914). *The psychology of management:* *The function of
the mind in determining, teaching, and installing methods of least
waste*. New York, NY: Sturgis and Walton.

Gilbreth, L. M. (1998). *As I remember: An autobiography of Lillian
Gilbreth*. Norcross, GA: Industrial Engineering and Management Press.

Gilmore, D. C., & Ferris, G. R. (1989). The effects of applicant
impression management tactics on interviewer judgments. *Journal of
Management,15*, 557–564.

Greenberg, J. (1993). Stealing in the name of justice: Informational and
interpersonal moderators of theft reactions to underpayment inequity.
*Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 54*, 81–103.

Greenberg, L., & Barling, J. (1999). Predicting employee agression
against coworkers, subordinates and supervisors: The roles of person
behaviors and perceived workplace factors. *Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 20*, 897–913.

Greenhaus, J. H., & Beutell, N. J. (1985). Sources of conflict between
work and family roles. *Academy of Management Review, 10*, 76–88.

Gyllensten, K., & Palmer, S. (2005). The role of gender in workplace
stress: A critical literature review. *Health Education Journal, 64*,
271–288.

Hoogendoorn, S., Oosterbeek, H., & van Praag, M. (2013). The impact of
gender diversity on the performance of business teams: Evidence from a
field experiment. *Management Science, 59*, 1514–1528.

Hosoda, M., Stone-Romero, E., & Coats, G. (2003). The effects of
physical attractiveness on job-related outcomes: A meta-analysis of
experimental studies. *Personnel Psychology, 56*, 431–462.

Howard, J. L., & Ferris, G. R. (1996). The employment interview context:
Social and situational influences on interviewer decisions. *Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 26*, 112–136.

Howell, W. C. (2003). Human factors and ergonomics. In W. C. Borman, D.
R. Ilgen, R. J. Limoski, & I. B. Weiner (Eds.), *Handbook of psychology:
Vol. 12: Industrial and organizational psychology* (pp. 565–593).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Human Rights Campaign. (2013a). *Cities and counties with
non-discrimination ordinances that include gender identity*. Retrieved
from
http://www.hrc.org/resources/entry/cities-and-counties-with-non-discrimination-ordinances-that-include-gender

Human Rights Campaign. (2013b). *Corporate equality index 2014: Rating
American workplaces on lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender equality*.
Retrieved from http://www.hrc.org/campaigns/corporate-equality-index

Jordan v. New London, No. 99-9188, 2000 U.S. App. LEXIS 22195 (2d Cir.
2000) (unpublished). Retrieved from
http://www.aele.org/apa/jordan-newlondon.html

Judge, T. A., & Kammeyer-Mueller, J. D. (2012). Job attitudes. *Annual
Reviews of Psychology, 63*, 341–367.

Judge, T. A., Piccolo, R. F., Podsakoff, N. P., Shaw, J. C., & Rich, B.
(2010). The relationship between pay and job satisfaction: A
meta-analysis of the literature. *Journal of Vocational Behavior, 77*,
157–167.

Judge, T. A., & Watanabe, S. (1993). Another look at the job
satisfaction–life satisfaction relationship. *Journal of Applied
Psychology, 78*, 939–948.

Kaiser, R. B., & Overfield, D. V. (2011). Strengths, strengths overused,
and lopsided leadership. *Consulting Psychology, 63*, 89–109.

Katzell, R. A., & Austin, J. T. (1992). From then to now: The
development of industrial–organizational psychology in the United
States. *Journal of Applied Psychology*, *77*, 803–835.

Khanna, C., Medsker, G. J., & Ginter, R. (2012). 2012 income and
employment survey results for the Society for Industrial and
Organizational Psychology. Retrieved from
http://www.siop.org/2012SIOPIncomeSurvey.pdf

Koppes, L. L. (1997). American female pioneers of industrial and
organizational psychology during the early years. *Journal of Applied
Psychology*, *82*, 500–515.

Lancaster, J. (2004). *Making time: Lillian Moller Gilbreth—A life
beyond “Cheaper by the Dozen.”* Boston, MA: Northeastern University
Press.

Lapierre, L. M., & Allen, T. D. (2006). Work-supportive family,
family-supportive supervision, use of organizational benefits, and
problem-focused coping: Implications for work–family conflict and
employee well-being. *Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 11*,
169–181.

Larson, C., & LaFasto, F. (1989). *Teamwork: What must go right / What
can go wrong*. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Levine, S. P., & Feldman, R. S. (2002). Women and men’s nonverbal
behavior and self-monitoring in a job interview setting. *Applied Human
Resources Management Research, 7*, 1–14.

Lewin, K., Lippitt, R., & White, R. K. (1939). Patterns of aggressive
behavior in experimentally created “social climates.” *Journal of Social
Psychology, 10*, 271–301.

Liden, R. C., Martin, C. L., & Parsons, C. K. (1993). Interviewer and
applicant behaviors in employment interviews. *Academy of Management
Journal, 36*, 373–386.

Lips, H. (2013). The gender pay gap: Challenging the rationalizations.
Perceived equity, discrimination, and the limits of human capital
models. *Sex Roles, 68*, 169–185.

Locke, E. A. (1976). The nature and causes of job satisfaction. In M. D.
Dunnette (Ed.), *Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology*
(pp. 1297–1349). Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.

Manley, K. (2009). The BFOQ defense: Title VII’s concession to gender
discrimination. *Duke Journal of Gender Law & Policy, 16*, 169–210.

McCarney, R., Warner, J., Iliffe, S., van Haselen, R., Griffin, M., &
Fisher, P. (2007). The Hawthorne effect: A randomised, controlled trial.
*BMC Medical Research Methodology,* *7*, 30.

McDaniel, M. A., Whetzel, D. L., Schmidt, F. L., & Maurer, S. D. (1994).
The validity of employment interviews: A comprehensive review and
meta-analysis. *Journal of Applied Psychology, 79*, 599–616.

McGregor, D. (1960). *The human side of enterprise*. New York, NY:
McGraw Hill.

McKeen, C., & Bujaki, M. (2007). Gender and mentoring. In B. R. Ragins &
K. E. Kram (Eds.), The handbook of mentoring at work: Theory, research
and practice (pp. 197–222). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

McMillan, S. K., Stevens, S., & Kelloway, E. K. (2009). History and
development of industrial/organizational psychology in the Canadian
forces personnel selection branch: 1938–2009. *Canadian Psychology,*
*50*, 283–291.

Meister, J. C., & Willyerd, K. (2010, May). Mentoring millennials.
*Harvard Business Review*, 1–4.

Münsterberg, H. (1913). *Psychology and industrial efficiency*. Boston,
MA: Houghton Mifflin Company.

Myers, K. K., & Sadaghiani, K. (2010). Millennials in the workplace: A
communication pespective on millennials organizational relationships and
performance. *Journal of Business Psychology, 25*, 225–238.

Naquin, C., & Tynan, R. (2003). The team halo effect: Why teams are not
blamed for their failures. *Journal of Applied Psychology, 88*, 332–340.

Occupational Safety & Health Administration. (2014). *Workplace
violence*. Retrieved from United States Department of Labor website:
https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/workplaceviolence/

O'Keefe, J., & Bruyere, S. (1994). *Implications of the Americans with
Disabilities Act for psychology*. New York, NY: Springer.

Ostroff, C., Kinicki, A. J., & Tamkins, M. M. (2003). Organizational
culture and climate. In W. C. Borman, D. R. Ilgen, R. J. Klimoski, & I.
B. Weiner (Eds.), *Handbook of psychology: Vol. 12: Industrial and
organizational psychology* (pp. 145–158). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Pettigrew, T. F., & Tropp, L. R. (2006). A meta-analytic test of
intergroup contact theory. *Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 90*, 751–783.

Posig, M., & Kickul, J. (2004). Work-role expectation and work family
conflict: Gender differences in emotional exhaustion. *Women in
Management Review, 19*, 373–386.

Powell, A., Piccoli, G., & Ives, B. (2004). Virtual teams: A review of
current literature and directions for future research. *The DATA BASE
for Advances in Information Systems, 35*, 6–36.

Ragins, B. R., & Cotton, J. L. (1999). Mentor functions and outcomes: A
comparison of men and women in formal and informal mentoring
relationships. *Journal of Applied Psychology, 84*, 529–550.

Rakić, T., Steffens, M. C., & Mummendey, A. (2011). When it matters how
you pronounce it: The influence of regional accents on job interview
outcome. *British Journal of Psychology,* *102*, 868–883.

Riley, M., Elgin, B., Lawrence, D., & Matlack, C. (2014, March 13).
Missed alarms and 40 million stolen credit card numbers: How Target blew
it. *Bloomberg Businessweek*. Retrieved from
http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2014-03-13/target-missed-alarms-in-epic-hack-of-credit-card-data

Roethlisberg, F., & Dickson, W. (1939). *Management and the worker*.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Saad, L. (2012). U.S. workers least happy with their work stress and
pay: Satisfaction is highest for safety conditions and relations with
coworkers. Retrieved from Gallup Economy website:
http://www.gallup.com/poll/158723/workers-least-happy-work-stress-pay.aspx

Saari, L. M., & Judge, T. A. (2004). Employee attitudes and job
satisfaction. *Human Resouce Management, 43*, 395–407.

Schraeder, M., Becton, J. B., & Portis, R. (2007). A critical
examination of performance appraisals: An organization’s friend or foe?
*The Journal for Quality and Participation, 30*, 20–25.

Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology (SIOP). (2014).
What value does SIOP membership provide? Retrieved from
http://www.siop.org/benefits/

Taylor, F. W. (1911). *The principles of scientific management*. New
York, NY: Harper & Brothers.

Tkaczyk, C. (2013, April 19). Marissa Mayer breaks her silence on
Yahoo's telecommuting policy. *Fortune*. Retrieved from
http://tech.fortune.cnn.com/2013/04/19/marissa-mayer-telecommuting/

The New York Times. (1999, Sept. 9). *Metro news briefs:
Connecticut—Judge rules that police can bar high IQ scores*. Retrieved
from
http://www.nytimes.com/1999/09/09/nyregion/metro-news-briefs-connecticut-judge-rules-that-police-can-bar-high-iq-scores.html

Tornow, W. W. (1993a). Editor’s note: Introduction to special issue on
360-degree feedback. *Human Resource Management, 32*, 211–219.

Tornow, W. W. (1993b). Perceptions or reality: Is multi-perspective
measurement a means or an end? *Human Resource Management, 32*, 221–229.

Toyota Motor Manufacturing. (2013). *Toyota production system terms*.
Retrieved from http://www.toyotageorgetown.com/terms.asp

Ugboro, I. O. (2006). Organizational commitment, job redesign, employee
empowerment and intent to quit among survivors of restructuring and
downsizing. *Journal of Behavioral and Applied Management, 7*, 232–257.

United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission. (2013). *Backgrounder on
the Three Mile Island accident*. Retrieved from
http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/fact-sheets/3mile-isle.html

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. (2014). *EEOC charge
receipts by state (includes U.S. territories) and basis for 2013*.
Retrieved from
http://www1.eeoc.gov/eeoc/statistics/enforcement/state\_13.cfm

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. (n.d.). *Facts about
sexual harassment*. Retrieved from
http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/publications/fs-sex.cfm

Van De Water, T. (1997). Psychology's entrepreneurs and the marketing of
industrial psychology. *Journal of Applied Psychology, 82*, 486–499.

van Knippenberg, D., van Knippenberg, B., Monden, L., & de Lima, F.
(2002). Organizational identification after a merger: A social identity
perspective. *British Journal of Social Psychology, 41*, 233–252.

Vinchur, A. J., & Koppes, L. L. (2014). Early contributors to the
science and practice of industrial psychology. In L. L. Koppes, (Ed.),
*Historical perspectives in industrial and organizational psychology*
(pp. 37–58). Mahweh, NJ: Erlbaum.

Weiss, H. M. (2002). Deconstructing job satisfaction: Separating
evaluations, beliefs and affective experiences. *Human Resouces
Management Review, 12*, 173–194.

.. |A collage of three color photographs is shown. From left to right appear a person in front of a laptop computer sitting outdoors, a person sitting on the floor with a laptop, and a person sitting on the couch with a small child and a laptop.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_13_00_IOPsych.jpg
