==================
Types of Treatment
==================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Distinguish
   between psychotherapy and biomedical therapy \* Recognize various
   orientations to psychotherapy \* Discuss psychotropic medications and
   recognize which medications are used to treat specific psychological
   disorders

One of the goals of therapy is to help a person stop repeating and
reenacting destructive patterns and to start looking for better
solutions to difficult situations. This goal is reflected in the
following poem:

\ *Autobiography in Five Short Chapters* by Portia Nelson (1993)

Chapter One \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

I walk down the street. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

There is a deep hole in the sidewalk. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

I fall in. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

I am lost. . . . I am helpless. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

It isn't my fault. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

It takes forever to find a way out.

Chapter Two \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

I walk down the same street. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

There is a deep hole in the sidewalk. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

I pretend I don't see it. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

I fall in again. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

I can't believe I am in this same place. \* \* \* {:
data-type=“newline”}

But, it isn't my fault. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

It still takes a long time to get out.

Chapter Three \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

I walk down the same street. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

There is a deep hole in the sidewalk. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

I *see* it is there. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

I still fall in . . . it's a habit . . . but, \* \* \* {:
data-type=“newline”}

my eyes are open. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

I know where I am. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

It is *my* fault. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

I get out immediately.

Chapter Four \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

I walk down the same street. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

There is a deep hole in the sidewalk. \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

I walk around it.

Chapter Five \* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

I walk down another street.

Two types of therapy are psychotherapy and biomedical therapy. Both
types of treatment help people with psychological disorders, such as
depression, anxiety, and schizophrenia. **Psychotherapy**\ {:
data-type=“term”} is a psychological treatment that employs various
methods to help someone overcome personal problems, or to attain
personal growth. In modern practice, it has evolved ino what is known as
psychodynamic therapy, which will be discussed later. **Biomedical
therapy**\ {: data-type=“term”} involves medication and/or medical
procedures to treat psychological disorders. First, we will explore the
various psychotherapeutic orientations outlined in
`[link] <#Table_16_02_01>`__ (many of these orientations were discussed
in the Introduction chapter).

.. raw:: html

   <table id="Table_16_02_01" summary="A table with three columns and seven rows is shown. From left to right, the columns are labeled “Type,” “Description,” and “Example.” Respectively, the first row reads: “Psychodynamic psychotherapy,” “Talk therapy based on belief that the unconscious and childhood conflicts impact behavior,” and “Patient talks about his past.” The next row reads: “Play therapy,” “Psychoanalytical therapy wherein interaction with toys is used instead of talk; used in child therapy,” and “Patient (child) acts out family scenes with dolls.” The next row reads: “Behavior therapy,” “Principles of learning applied to change undesirable behaviors,” and “Patient learns to overcome fear of elevators through several stages of relaxation techniques.” The next row reads: “Cognitive therapy,” “Awareness of cognitive process helps patients eliminate thought patterns that lead to distress,” and “Patient learns not to overgeneralize failure based on single failure.” The next row reads: “Cognitive-behavior therapy,” “Work to change cognitive distortions and self-defeating behaviors,” and “Patient learns to identify self-defeating behaviors to overcome an eating disorder.” The final row reads: “Humanistic therapy,” “Increase self-awareness and acceptance through focus on conscious thoughts,” and “Patient learns to articulate thoughts that keep her from achieving her goals.”">

.. raw:: html

   <caption>

Various Psychotherapy Techniques

.. raw:: html

   </caption>

.. raw:: html

   <thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Type

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Description

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Example

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tbody>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Psychodynamic psychotherapy

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Talk therapy based on belief that the unconscious and childhood
conflicts impact behavior

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Patient talks about his past

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Play therapy

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Psychoanalytical therapy wherein interaction with toys is used instead
of talk; used in child therapy

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Patient (child) acts out family scenes with dolls

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Behavior therapy

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Principles of learning applied to change undesirable behaviors

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Patient learns to overcome fear of elevators through several stages of
relaxation techniques

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Cognitive therapy

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Awareness of cognitive process helps patients eliminate thought patterns
that lead to distress

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Patient learns not to overgeneralize failure based on single failure

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Cognitive-behavioral therapy

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Work to change cognitive distortions and self-defeating behaviors

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Patient learns to identify self-defeating behaviors to overcome an
eating disorder

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Humanistic therapy

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Increase self-awareness and acceptance through focus on conscious
thoughts

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Patient learns to articulate thoughts that keep her from achieving her
goals

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </tbody>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

PSYCHOTHERAPY TECHNIQUES: PSYCHOANALYSIS
========================================

Psychoanalysis was developed by Sigmund **Freud**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis} and was the first form of psychotherapy. It was the
dominant therapeutic technique in the early 20th century, but it has
since waned significantly in popularity. Freud believed most of our
psychological problems are the result of repressed impulses and trauma
experienced in childhood, and he believed psychoanalysis would help
uncover long-buried feelings. In a psychoanalyst’s office, you might see
a patient lying on a couch speaking of dreams or childhood memories, and
the therapist using various Freudian methods such as free association
and dream analysis (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_16_02_FreudCouch>`__). In **free
association**\ {: data-type=“term”}, the patient relaxes and then says
whatever comes to mind at the moment. However, Freud felt that the ego
would at times try to block, or repress, unacceptable urges or painful
conflicts during free association. Consequently, a patient would
demonstrate resistance to recalling these thoughts or situations. In
**dream analysis**\ {: data-type=“term”}, a therapist interprets the
underlying meaning of dreams.

Psychoanalysis is a therapy approach that typically takes years. Over
the course of time, the patient reveals a great deal about himself to
the therapist. Freud suggested that during this patient-therapist
relationship, the patient comes to develop strong feelings for the
therapist—maybe positive feelings, maybe negative feelings. Freud called
this **transference**\ {: data-type=“term”}: the patient transfers all
the positive or negative emotions associated with the patient’s other
relationships to the psychoanalyst. For example, Crystal is seeing a
psychoanalyst. During the years of therapy, she comes to see her
therapist as a father figure. She transfers her feelings about her
father onto her therapist, perhaps in an effort to gain the love and
attention she did not receive from her own father.

|This photograph shows what Freud’s famous psychoanalytic couch looked
like. The couch is draped in tapestries and pillows, and the room is
decorated with sculptures, books and pictures on the wall.|\ {:
#CNX_Psych_16_02_FreudCouch}

Today, Freud’s psychoanalytical perspective has been expanded upon by
the developments of subsequent theories and methodologies: the
**psychodynamic**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} perspective. This
approach to therapy remains centered on the role of people’s internal
drives and forces, but treatment is less intensive than Freud’s original
model.

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   View a `brief video <http://openstax.org/l/psycanalysis>`__ that
   presents an overview of psychoanalysis theory, research, and
   practice.

PSYCHOTHERAPY: PLAY THERAPY
===========================

**Play therapy**\ {: data-type=“term”} is often used with children since
they are not likely to sit on a couch and recall their dreams or engage
in traditional talk therapy. This technique uses a therapeutic process
of play to “help clients prevent or resolve psychosocial difficulties
and achieve optimal growth” (O’Connor, 2000, p. 7). The idea is that
children play out their hopes, fantasies, and traumas while using dolls,
stuffed animals, and sandbox figurines
(`[link] <#CNX_Psych_16_02_Sandtray>`__). Play therapy can also be used
to help a therapist make a diagnosis. The therapist observes how the
child interacts with toys (e.g., dolls, animals, and home settings) in
an effort to understand the roots of the child’s disturbed behavior.
Play therapy can be nondirective or directive. In nondirective play
therapy, children are encouraged to work through their problems by
playing freely while the therapist observes (LeBlanc & Ritchie, 2001).
In directive play therapy, the therapist provides more structure and
guidance in the play session by suggesting topics, asking questions, and
even playing with the child (Harter, 1977).

|This photograph shows a person playing with objects in a small box
filled with sand. The person is organizing these objects and small play
figures in a form of treatment called sandplay.|\ {:
#CNX_Psych_16_02_Sandtray}

PSYCHOTHERAPY: BEHAVIOR THERAPY
===============================

In **psychoanalysis**\ {: data-type=“term”}, therapists help their
patients look into their past to uncover repressed feelings. In
**behavior therapy**\ {: data-type=“term”}, a therapist employs
principles of learning to help clients change undesirable
behaviors—rather than digging deeply into one’s unconscious. Therapists
with this orientation believe that dysfunctional behaviors, like phobias
and bedwetting, can be changed by teaching clients new, more
constructive behaviors. Behavior therapy employs both classical and
operant conditioning techniques to change behavior.

One type of behavior therapy utilizes classical conditioning techniques.
Therapists using these techniques believe that dysfunctional behaviors
are conditioned responses. Applying the conditioning principles
developed by Ivan Pavlov, these therapists seek to recondition their
clients and thus change their behavior. Emmie is eight years old, and
frequently wets her bed at night. She’s been invited to several
sleepovers, but she won’t go because of her problem. Using a type of
conditioning therapy, Emmie begins to sleep on a liquid-sensitive bed
pad that is hooked to an alarm. When moisture touches the pad, it sets
off the alarm, waking up Emmie. When this process is repeated enough
times, Emmie develops an association between urinary relaxation and
waking up, and this stops the bedwetting. Emmie has now gone three weeks
without wetting her bed and is looking forward to her first sleepover
this weekend.

One commonly used classical conditioning therapeutic technique is
**counterconditioning**\ {: data-type=“term”}: a client learns a new
response to a stimulus that has previously elicited an undesirable
behavior. Two counterconditioning techniques are aversive conditioning
and exposure therapy. **Aversive conditioning**\ {: data-type=“term”}
uses an unpleasant stimulus to stop an undesirable behavior. Therapists
apply this technique to eliminate addictive behaviors, such as smoking,
nail biting, and drinking. In aversion therapy, clients will typically
engage in a specific behavior (such as nail biting) and at the same time
are exposed to something unpleasant, such as a mild electric shock or a
bad taste. After repeated associations between the unpleasant stimulus
and the behavior, the client can learn to stop the unwanted behavior.

Aversion therapy has been used effectively for years in the treatment of
alcoholism (Davidson, 1974; Elkins, 1991; Streeton & Whelan, 2001). One
common way this occurs is through a chemically based substance known as
Antabuse. When a person takes Antabuse and then consumes alcohol,
uncomfortable side effects result including nausea, vomiting, increased
heart rate, heart palpitations, severe headache, and shortness of
breath. Antabuse is repeatedly paired with alcohol until the client
associates alcohol with unpleasant feelings, which decreases the
client’s desire to consume alcohol. Antabuse creates a conditioned
aversion to alcohol because it replaces the original pleasure response
with an unpleasant one.

In **exposure therapy**\ {: data-type=“term”}, a therapist seeks to
treat clients’ fears or anxiety by presenting them with the object or
situation that causes their problem, with the idea that they will
eventually get used to it. This can be done via reality, imagination, or
virtual reality. Exposure therapy was first reported in 1924 by Mary
Cover Jones, who is considered the mother of behavior therapy. Jones
worked with a boy named Peter who was afraid of rabbits. Her goal was to
replace Peter’s fear of rabbits with a conditioned response of
relaxation, which is a response that is incompatible with fear
(`[link] <#CNX_Psych_16_02_Conditioning>`__). How did she do it? Jones
began by placing a caged rabbit on the other side of a room with Peter
while he ate his afternoon snack. Over the course of several days, Jones
moved the rabbit closer and closer to where Peter was seated with his
snack. After two months of being exposed to the rabbit while relaxing
with his snack, Peter was able to hold the rabbit and pet it while
eating (Jones, 1924).

|This figure, titled “Exposure Therapy,” illustrates the exposure
therapy strategy of Mary Cover Jones to rid a person of the fear of
rabbits. The first of four levels depicts an image of a person and a
rabbit with an equals sign between them. Under the rabbit reads
“conditioned stimulus (CS),” and under the person reads “fear of
rabbits.” The second level depicts an image of milk and cookies, labeled
“unconditioned stimulus (US),” and on the other side of an equals sign
there is a picture of the same person labeled “unconditioned response
(UR).” The third level shows the milk and cookies, labeled
“unconditioned stimulus (US),” and rabbit, labeled “conditioned stimulus
(CS),” to the left and right of a plus sign, with the person on the
other side of an equals sign. The label “unconditioned response (UR) is
below the person.” The final level shows the person and the rabbit
separated by an equals sign. This time the rabbit is labeled
“conditioned stimulus (CS)” and the person is labeled “conditioned
response (CR).”|\ {: #CNX_Psych_16_02_Conditioning}

Thirty years later, Joseph Wolpe (1958) refined Jones’s techniques,
giving us the behavior therapy technique of exposure therapy that is
used today. A popular form of exposure therapy is **systematic
desensitization**\ {: data-type=“term”}, wherein a calm and pleasant
state is gradually associated with increasing levels of anxiety-inducing
stimuli. The idea is that you can’t be nervous and relaxed at the same
time. Therefore, if you can learn to relax when you are facing
environmental stimuli that make you nervous or fearful, you can
eventually eliminate your unwanted fear response (Wolpe, 1958)
(`[link] <#CNX_Psych_16_02_Spider>`__).

|A close-up picture of a very large spider on a person’s arm is shown.
The person is using its other hand to hold up two of the spider’s
legs.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_16_02_Spider}

How does exposure therapy work? Jayden is terrified of elevators.
Nothing bad has ever happened to him on an elevator, but he’s so afraid
of elevators that he will always take the stairs. That wasn’t a problem
when Jayden worked on the second floor of an office building, but now he
has a new job—on the 29th floor of a skyscraper in downtown Los Angeles.
Jayden knows he can’t climb 29 flights of stairs in order to get to work
each day, so he decided to see a behavior therapist for help. The
therapist asks Jayden to first construct a hierarchy of elevator-related
situations that elicit fear and anxiety. They range from situations of
mild anxiety such as being nervous around the other people in the
elevator, to the fear of getting an arm caught in the door, to
panic-provoking situations such as getting trapped or the cable
snapping. Next, the therapist uses progressive relaxation. She teaches
Jayden how to relax each of his muscle groups so that he achieves a
drowsy, relaxed, and comfortable state of mind. Once he’s in this state,
she asks Jayden to imagine a mildly anxiety-provoking situation. Jayden
is standing in front of the elevator thinking about pressing the call
button.

If this scenario causes Jayden anxiety, he lifts his finger. The
therapist would then tell Jayden to forget the scene and return to his
relaxed state. She repeats this scenario over and over until Jayden can
imagine himself pressing the call button without anxiety. Over time the
therapist and Jayden use progressive relaxation and imagination to
proceed through all of the situations on Jayden’s hierarchy until he
becomes desensitized to each one. After this, Jayden and the therapist
begin to practice what he only previously envisioned in therapy,
gradually going from pressing the button to actually riding an elevator.
The goal is that Jayden will soon be able to take the elevator all the
way up to the 29th floor of his office without feeling any anxiety.

Sometimes, it’s too impractical, expensive, or embarrassing to re-create
anxiety- producing situations, so a therapist might employ **virtual
reality exposure therapy**\ {: data-type=“term”} by using a simulation
to help conquer fears. Virtual reality exposure therapy has been used
effectively to treat numerous anxiety disorders such as the fear of
public speaking, claustrophobia (fear of enclosed spaces), aviophobia
(fear of flying), and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), a trauma
and stressor-related disorder (Gerardi, Cukor, Difede, Rizzo, &
Rothbaum, 2010).

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   A new virtual reality exposure therapy is being used to treat PTSD in
   soldiers. Virtual Iraq is a simulation that mimics Middle Eastern
   cities and desert roads with situations similar to those soldiers
   experienced while deployed in Iraq. This method of virtual reality
   exposure therapy has been effective in treating PTSD for combat
   veterans. Approximately 80% of participants who completed treatment
   saw clinically significant reduction in their symptoms of PTSD,
   anxiety, and depression (Rizzo et al., 2010). Watch this `Virtual
   Iraq video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QCCWH_CNjM0>`__ showing
   soldiers being treated via simulation.

Some behavior therapies employ operant conditioning. Recall what you
learned about operant conditioning: We have a tendency to repeat
behaviors that are reinforced. What happens to behaviors that are not
reinforced? They become extinguished. These principles can be applied to
help people with a wide range of psychological problems. For instance,
operant conditioning techniques designed to reinforce positive behaviors
and punish unwanted behaviors have been an effective tool to help
children with autism (Lovaas, 1987, 2003; Sallows & Graupner, 2005; Wolf
& Risley, 1967). This technique is called Applied Behavior Analysis
(ABA). In this treatment, child-specific reinforcers (e.g., stickers,
praise, candy, bubbles, and extra play time) are used to reward and
motivate autistic children when they demonstrate desired behaviors such
as sitting on a chair when requested, verbalizing a greeting, or making
eye contact. Punishment such as a timeout or a sharp “No!” from the
therapist or parent might be used to discourage undesirable behaviors
such as pinching, scratching, and pulling hair.

One popular operant conditioning intervention is called the **token
economy**\ {: data-type=“term”}. This involves a controlled setting
where individuals are reinforced for desirable behaviors with tokens,
such as a poker chip, that can be exchanged for items or privileges.
Token economies are often used in psychiatric hospitals to increase
patient cooperation and activity levels. Patients are rewarded with
tokens when they engage in positive behaviors (e.g., making their beds,
brushing their teeth, coming to the cafeteria on time, and socializing
with other patients). They can later exchange the tokens for extra TV
time, private rooms, visits to the canteen, and so on (Dickerson,
Tenhula, & Green-Paden, 2005).

PSYCHOTHERAPY: COGNITIVE THERAPY
================================

**Cognitive therapy**\ {: data-type=“term”} is a form of psychotherapy
that focuses on how a person’s thoughts lead to feelings of distress.
The idea behind cognitive therapy is that how you think determines how
you feel and act. Cognitive therapists help their clients change
dysfunctional thoughts in order to relieve distress. They help a client
see how they misinterpret a situation (cognitive distortion). For
example, a client may overgeneralize. Because Ray failed one test in his
Psychology 101 course, he feels he is stupid and worthless. These
thoughts then cause his mood to worsen. Therapists also help clients
recognize when they blow things out of proportion. Because Ray failed
his Psychology 101 test, he has concluded that he’s going to fail the
entire course and probably flunk out of college altogether. These errors
in thinking have contributed to Ray’s feelings of distress. His
therapist will help him challenge these irrational beliefs, focus on
their illogical basis, and correct them with more logical and rational
thoughts and beliefs.

Cognitive therapy was developed by psychiatrist Aaron **Beck**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} in the 1960s. His initial focus was on
depression and how a client’s self-defeating attitude served to maintain
a depression despite positive factors in her life (Beck, Rush, Shaw, &
Emery, 1979) (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_16_02_Cognitive>`__). Through
questioning, a cognitive therapist can help a client recognize
dysfunctional ideas, challenge catastrophizing thoughts about themselves
and their situations, and find a more positive way to view things (Beck,
2011).

|This graphic depicts two three-box flowcharts showing reactions to
failing a test. The first flowchart flows from “Failed test” to
“Internal beliefs: I’m worthless and stupid” to “Depression.” The second
flowchart flows from “Failed test” to “Internal beliefs: I’m smart, but
I didn’t study for this test. I can do better.” to “No depression.”|\ {:
#CNX_Psych_16_02_Cognitive}

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   View a brief video in which `Judith Beck talks about cognitive
   therapy <http://openstax.org/l/JBeck>`__ and conducts a session with
   a client.

PSYCHOTHERAPY: COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL THERAPY
===========================================

Cognitive-behavioral therapists focus much more on present issues than
on a patient’s childhood or past, as in other forms of psychotherapy.
One of the first forms of cognitive-behavioral therapy was **rational
emotive therapy (RET)**\ {: data-type=“term”}, which was founded by
Albert Ellis and grew out of his dislike of Freudian psychoanalysis
(Daniel, n.d.). Behaviorists such as Joseph Wolpe also influenced
Ellis’s therapeutic approach (National Association of
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapists, 2009).

**Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)**\ {: data-type=“term”} helps
clients examine how their thoughts affect their behavior. It aims to
change cognitive distortions and self-defeating behaviors. In essence,
this approach is designed to change the way people think as well as how
they act. It is similar to cognitive therapy in that CBT attempts to
make individuals aware of their irrational and negative thoughts and
helps people replace them with new, more positive ways of thinking. It
is also similar to behavior therapies in that CBT teaches people how to
practice and engage in more positive and healthy approaches to daily
situations. In total, hundreds of studies have shown the effectiveness
of cognitive-behavioral therapy in the treatment of numerous
psychological disorders such as depression, PTSD, anxiety disorders,
eating disorders, bipolar disorder, and substance abuse (Beck Institute
for Cognitive Behavior Therapy, n.d.). For example, CBT has been found
to be effective in decreasing levels of hopelessness and suicidal
thoughts in previously suicidal teenagers (Alavi, Sharifi, Ghanizadeh, &
Dehbozorgi, 2013). Cognitive-behavioral therapy has also been effective
in reducing PTSD in specific populations, such as transit workers
(Lowinger & Rombom, 2012).

Cognitive-behavioral therapy aims to change cognitive distortions and
self-defeating behaviors using techniques like the ABC model. With this
model, there is an **A**\ ction (sometimes called an activating event),
the **B**\ elief about the event, and the **C**\ onsequences of this
belief. Let’s say, Jon and Joe both go to a party. Jon and Joe each have
met a young woman at the party: Jon is talking with Megan most of the
party, and Joe is talking with Amanda. At the end of the party, Jon asks
Megan for her phone number and Joe asks Amanda. Megan tells Jon she
would rather not give him her number, and Amanda tells Joe the same
thing. Both Jon and Joe are surprised, as they thought things were going
well. What can Jon and Joe tell themselves about why the women were not
interested? Let’s say Jon tells himself he is a loser, or is ugly, or
“has no game.” Jon then gets depressed and decides not to go to another
party, which starts a cycle that keeps him depressed. Joe tells himself
that he had bad breath, goes out and buys a new toothbrush, goes to
another party, and meets someone new.

Jon’s belief about what happened results in a consequence of further
depression, whereas Joe’s belief does not. Jon is internalizing the
attribution or reason for the rebuffs, which triggers his depression. On
the other hand, Joe is externalizing the cause, so his thinking does not
contribute to feelings of depression. Cognitive-behavioral therapy
examines specific maladaptive and automatic thoughts and cognitive
distortions. Some examples of cognitive distortions are all-or-nothing
thinking, overgeneralization, and jumping to conclusions. In
overgeneralization, someone takes a small situation and makes it
huge—for example, instead of saying, “This particular woman was not
interested in me,” the man says, “I am ugly, a loser, and no one is ever
going to be interested in me.”

All or nothing thinking, which is a common type of cognitive distortion
for people suffering from depression, reflects extremes. In other words,
everything is black or white. After being turned down for a date, Jon
begins to think, “No woman will ever go out with me. I’m going to be
alone forever.” He begins to feel anxious and sad as he contemplates his
future.

The third kind of distortion involves jumping to conclusions—assuming
that people are thinking negatively about you or reacting negatively to
you, even though there is no evidence. Consider the example of Savannah
and Hillaire, who recently met at a party. They have a lot in common,
and Savannah thinks they could become friends. She calls Hillaire to
invite her for coffee. Since Hillaire doesn’t answer, Savannah leaves
her a message. Several days go by and Savannah never hears back from her
potential new friend. Maybe Hillaire never received the message because
she lost her phone or she is too busy to return the phone call. But if
Savannah believes that Hillaire didn’t like Savannah or didn’t want to
be her friend, she is demonstrating the cognitive distortion of jumping
to conclusions.

How effective is CBT? One client said this about his
cognitive-behavioral therapy:

I have had many painful episodes of depression in my life, and this has
had a negative effect on my career and has put considerable strain on my
friends and family. The treatments I have received, such as taking
antidepressants and psychodynamic counseling, have helped [me] to cope
with the symptoms and to get some insights into the roots of my
problems. CBT has been by far the most useful approach I have found in
tackling these mood problems. It has raised my awareness of how my
thoughts impact on my moods. How the way I think about myself, about
others and about the world can lead me into depression. It is a
practical approach, which does not dwell so much on childhood
experiences, whilst acknowledging that it was then that these patterns
were learned. It looks at what is happening now, and gives tools to
manage these moods on a daily basis. (Martin, 2007, n.p.)

PSYCHOTHERAPY: HUMANISTIC THERAPY
=================================

Humanistic psychology focuses on helping people achieve their potential.
So it makes sense that the goal of **humanistic therapy**\ {:
data-type=“term”} is to help people become more self-aware and accepting
of themselves. In contrast to psychoanalysis, humanistic therapists
focus on conscious rather than unconscious thoughts. They also emphasize
the patient’s present and future, as opposed to exploring the patient’s
past.

Psychologist Carl **Rogers**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}
developed a therapeutic orientation known as **Rogerian**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, or **client-centered therapy**\ {: data-type=“term”}.
Note the change from *patients* to *clients*. Rogers (1951) felt that
the term patient suggested the person seeking help was sick and looking
for a cure. Since this is a form of **nondirective therapy**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, a therapeutic approach in which the therapist does
not give advice or provide interpretations but helps the person to
identify conflicts and understand feelings, Rogers (1951) emphasized the
importance of the person taking control of his own life to overcome
life’s challenges.

In client-centered therapy, the therapist uses the technique of active
listening. In active listening, the therapist acknowledges, restates,
and clarifies what the client expresses. Therapists also practice what
Rogers called **unconditional positive regard**\ {: data-type=“term”},
which involves not judging clients and simply accepting them for who
they are. Rogers (1951) also felt that therapists should demonstrate
genuineness, empathy, and acceptance toward their clients because this
helps people become more accepting of themselves, which results in
personal growth.

EVALUATING VARIOUS FORMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY
=========================================

How can we assess the effectiveness of psychotherapy? Is one technique
more effective than another? For anyone considering therapy, these are
important questions. According to the American Psychological
Association, three factors work together to produce successful
treatment. The first is the use of evidence-based treatment that is
deemed appropriate for your particular issue. The second important
factor is the clinical expertise of the psychologist or therapist. The
third factor is your own characteristics, values, preferences, and
culture. Many people begin psychotherapy feeling like their problem will
never be resolved; however, psychotherapy helps people see that they can
do things to make their situation better. Psychotherapy can help reduce
a person’s anxiety, depression, and maladaptive behaviors. Through
psychotherapy, individuals can learn to engage in healthy behaviors
designed to help them better express emotions, improve relationships,
think more positively, and perform more effectively at work or school.

Many studies have explored the effectiveness of psychotherapy. For
example, one large-scale study that examined 16 meta-analyses of CBT
reported that it was equally effective or more effective than other
therapies in treating PTSD, generalized anxiety disorder, depression,
and social phobia (Butlera, Chapmanb, Formanc, & Becka, 2006). Another
study found that CBT was as effective at treating depression (43%
success rate) as prescription medication (50% success rate) compared to
the placebo rate of 25% (DeRubeis et al., 2005). Another meta-analysis
found that psychodynamic therapy was also as effective at treating these
types of psychological issues as CBT (Shedler, 2010). However, no
studies have found one psychotherapeutic approach more effective than
another (Abbass, Kisely, & Kroenke, 2006; Chorpita et al., 2011), nor
have they shown any relationship between a client’s treatment outcome
and the level of the clinician’s training or experience (Wampold, 2007).
Regardless of which type of psychotherapy an individual chooses, one
critical factor that determines the success of treatment is the person’s
relationship with the psychologist or therapist.

BIOMEDICAL THERAPIES
====================

Individuals can be prescribed biologically based treatments or
psychotropic medications that are used to treat mental disorders. While
these are often used in combination with psychotherapy, they also are
taken by individuals not in therapy. This is known as **biomedical
therapy**\ {: data-type=“term”}. Medications used to treat psychological
disorders are called psychotropic medications and are prescribed by
medical doctors, including psychiatrists. In Louisiana and New Mexico,
psychologists are able to prescribe some types of these medications
(American Psychological Association, 2014).

Different types and classes of medications are prescribed for different
disorders. A depressed person might be given an antidepressant, a
bipolar individual might be given a mood stabilizer, and a schizophrenic
individual might be given an antipsychotic. These medications treat the
symptoms of a psychological disorder. They can help people feel better
so that they can function on a daily basis, but they do not cure the
disorder. Some people may only need to take a psychotropic medication
for a short period of time. Others with severe disorders like bipolar
disorder or schizophrenia may need to take psychotropic medication for a
long time. `[link] <#Table_16_02_02>`__ shows the types of medication
and how they are used.

.. raw:: html

   <table id="Table_16_02_02" summary="A table showing different types of medication, the diseases they are used to treat, the brand names of the medications, how they work, and the side effects is shown. The order of the categories in each row is as follows: “Type of Medication,” “Used to Treat,” “Brand Names of Commonly Prescribed Medications,” “How They Work,” and “Side Effects.” The information for “Antipsychotics (developed in the 1950s)” is as follows: “Schizophrenia and other types of severe thought disorders,” “Haldol, Mellaril, Prolixin, Thorazine,” “Treat positive psychotic symptoms such as auditory and visual hallucinations, delusions, and paranoia by blocking the neurotransmitter dopamine,” and “Long-term use can lead to involuntary movements of the arms, legs, tongue and facial muscles, resulting in Parkinson’s-like tremors.” The information for “Atypical Antipsychotics (developed in the late 1980s)” is as follows: “Schizophrenia and other types of severe thought disorders,” “Abilify, Risperdal, Clozaril,” “Treat the negative symptoms of schizophrenia, such as withdrawal and apathy, by targeting both dopamine and serotonin receptors; newer medications may treat both positive and negative symptoms,” and “Can increase the risk of obesity and diabetes as well as elevate cholesterol levels; constipation, dry mouth, blurred vision, drowsiness, and dizziness.” The information for “Anti-depressants” is as follows: “Depression and increasingly for anxiety,” “Paxil, Prozac, Zoloft (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, [SSRIs]); Tofranil and Elavil (tricyclics),” “Alter levels of neurotransmitters such as serotonin and norepinephrine,” “SSRIs: headache, nausea, weight gain, drowsiness, reduced sex drive; Tricyclics: dry mouth, constipation, blurred vision, drowsiness, reduced sex drive, increased risk of suicide.” The information for “Anti-anxiety agents” is as follows: “Anxiety and agitation that occur in OCD, PTSD, panic disorder, and social phobia,” “Xanax, Valium, Ativan,” “Depress central nervous system activity,” and “Drowsiness, dizziness, headache, fatigue, lightheadedness.” The information for “Mood Stabilizers” is as follows: “Bipolar disorder,” “Lithium, Depakote, Lamictal, Tegretol,” “Treat episodes of mania as well as depression,” and “Excessive thirst, irregular heartbeat, itching/rash, swelling (face, mouth, and extremities), nausea, loss of appetite.” The information for “Stimulants” is as follows: “ADHD,” “Adderall, Ritalin,” “Improve ability to focus on a task and maintain attention,” and “Decreased appetite, difficulty sleeping, stomachache, headache.”">

.. raw:: html

   <caption>

Commonly Prescribed Psychotropic Medications

.. raw:: html

   </caption>

.. raw:: html

   <thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Type of Medication

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Used to Treat

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Brand Names of Commonly Prescribed Medications

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

How They Work

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Side Effects

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tbody>

.. raw:: html

   <tr valign="top">

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Antipsychotics (developed in the 1950s)

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Schizophrenia and other types of severe thought disorders

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Haldol, Mellaril, Prolixin, Thorazine

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Treat positive psychotic symptoms such as auditory and visual
hallucinations, delusions, and paranoia by blocking the neurotransmitter
dopamine

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Long-term use can lead to tardive dyskinesia, involuntary movements of
the arms, legs, tongue and facial muscles, resulting in Parkinson’s-like
tremors

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr valign="top">

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Atypical Antipsychotics (developed in the late 1980s)

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Schizophrenia and other types of severe thought disorders

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Abilify, Risperdal, Clozaril

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Treat the negative symptoms of schizophrenia, such as withdrawal and
apathy, by targeting both dopamine and serotonin receptors; newer
medications may treat both positive and negative symptoms

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Can increase the risk of obesity and diabetes as well as elevate
cholesterol levels; constipation, dry mouth, blurred vision, drowsiness,
and dizziness

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr valign="top">

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Anti-depressants

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Depression and increasingly for anxiety

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Paxil, Prozac, Zoloft (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors,
[SSRIs]); Tofranil and Elavil (tricyclics)

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Alter levels of neurotransmitters such as serotonin and norepinephrine

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

SSRIs: headache, nausea, weight gain, drowsiness, reduced sex drive

.. raw:: html

   <hr data-type="newline" />

Tricyclics: dry mouth, constipation, blurred vision, drowsiness, reduced
sex drive, increased risk of suicide

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr valign="top">

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Anti-anxiety agents

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Anxiety and agitation that occur in OCD, PTSD, panic disorder, and
social phobia

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Xanax, Valium, Ativan

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Depress central nervous system activity

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Drowsiness, dizziness, headache, fatigue, lightheadedness

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr valign="top">

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Mood Stabilizers

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Bipolar disorder

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Lithium, Depakote, Lamictal, Tegretol

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Treat episodes of mania as well as depression

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Excessive thirst, irregular heartbeat, itching/rash, swelling (face,
mouth, and extremities), nausea, loss of appetite

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr valign="top">

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Stimulants

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

ADHD

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Adderall, Ritalin

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Improve ability to focus on a task and maintain attention

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Decreased appetite, difficulty sleeping, stomachache, headache

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </tbody>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

Another biologically based treatment that continues to be used, although
infrequently, is **electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)**\ {:
data-type=“term”} (formerly known by its unscientific name as
electroshock therapy). It involves using an electrical current to induce
seizures to help alleviate the effects of severe depression. The exact
mechanism is unknown, although it does help alleviate symptoms for
people with severe depression who have not responded to traditional drug
therapy (Pagnin, de Queiroz, Pini, & Cassano, 2004). About 85% of people
treated with ECT improve (Reti, n.d.). However, the memory loss
associated with repeated administrations has led to it being implemented
as a last resort (Donahue, 2000; Prudic, Peyser, & Sackeim, 2000). A
more recent alternative is transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), a
procedure approved by the FDA in 2008 that uses magnetic fields to
stimulate nerve cells in the brain to improve depression symptoms; it is
used when other treatments have not worked (Mayo Clinic, 2012).

.. container:: psychology dig-deeper

   .. container::

      Evidence-based Practice

   A buzzword in therapy today is evidence-based practice. However, it’s
   not a novel concept but one that has been used in medicine for at
   least two decades. Evidence-based practice is used to reduce errors
   in treatment selection by making clinical decisions based on research
   (Sackett & Rosenberg, 1995). In any case, evidence-based treatment is
   on the rise in the field of psychology. So what is it, and why does
   it matter? In an effort to determine which treatment methodologies
   are evidenced-based, professional organizations such as the American
   Psychological Association (APA) have recommended that specific
   psychological treatments be used to treat certain psychological
   disorders (Chambless & Ollendick, 2001). According to the APA (2005),
   “Evidence-based practice in psychology (EBPP) is the integration of
   the best available research with clinical expertise in the context of
   patient characteristics, culture, and preferences” (p. 1).

   The foundational idea behind evidence based treatment is that best
   practices are determined by research evidence that has been compiled
   by comparing various forms of treatment (Charman & Barkham, 2005).
   These treatments are then operationalized and placed in treatment
   manuals—trained therapists follow these manuals. The benefits are
   that evidence-based treatment can reduce variability between
   therapists to ensure that a specific approach is delivered with
   integrity (Charman & Barkham, 2005). Therefore, clients have a higher
   chance of receiving therapeutic interventions that are effective at
   treating their specific disorder. While EBPP is based on randomized
   control trials, critics of EBPP reject it stating that the results of
   trials cannot be applied to individuals and instead determinations
   regarding treatment should be based on a therapist’s judgment (Mullen
   & Streiner, 2004).

Summary
=======

Psychoanalysis was developed by Sigmund Freud. Freud’s theory is that a
person’s psychological problems are the result of repressed impulses or
childhood trauma. The goal of the therapist is to help a person uncover
buried feelings by using techniques such as free association and dream
analysis.

Play therapy is a psychodynamic therapy technique often used with
children. The idea is that children play out their hopes, fantasies, and
traumas, using dolls, stuffed animals, and sandbox figurines.

In behavior therapy, a therapist employs principles of learning from
classical and operant conditioning to help clients change undesirable
behaviors. Counterconditioning is a commonly used therapeutic technique
in which a client learns a new response to a stimulus that has
previously elicited an undesirable behavior via classical conditioning.
Principles of operant conditioning can be applied to help people deal
with a wide range of psychological problems. Token economy is an example
of a popular operant conditioning technique.

Cognitive therapy is a technique that focuses on how thoughts lead to
feelings of distress. The idea behind cognitive therapy is that how you
think determines how you feel and act. Cognitive therapists help clients
change dysfunctional thoughts in order to relieve distress.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy explores how our thoughts affect our
behavior. Cognitive-behavioral therapy aims to change cognitive
distortions and self-defeating behaviors.

Humanistic therapy focuses on helping people achieve their potential.
One form of humanistic therapy developed by Carl Rogers is known as
client-centered or Rogerian therapy. Client-centered therapists use the
techniques of active listening, unconditional positive regard,
genuineness, and empathy to help clients become more accepting of
themselves.

Often in combination with psychotherapy, people can be prescribed
biologically based treatments such as psychotropic medications and/or
other medical procedures such as electro-convulsive therapy.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      The idea behind \_______\_ is that how you think determines how
      you feel and act.

      1. cognitive therapy
      2. cognitive-behavioral therapy
      3. behavior therapy
      4. client-centered therapy {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      Mood stabilizers, such as lithium, are used to treat \________.

      1. anxiety disorders
      2. depression
      3. bipolar disorder
      4. ADHD {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      Clay is in a therapy session. The therapist asks him to relax and
      say whatever comes to his mind at the moment. This therapist is
      using \________, which is a technique of \________.

      1. active listening; client-centered therapy
      2. systematic desensitization; behavior therapy
      3. transference; psychoanalysis
      4. free association; psychoanalysis {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

Critical Thinking Question
==========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Imagine that you are a psychiatrist. Your patient, Pat, comes to
      you with the following symptoms: anxiety and feelings of sadness.
      Which therapeutic approach would you recommend and why?

   .. container::

      I would recommend psychodynamic talk therapy or cognitive therapy
      to help the person see how her thoughts and behaviors are having
      negative effects.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      If you were to choose a therapist practicing one of the techniques
      presented in this section, which kind of therapist would you
      choose and why?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   aversive conditioning
      counterconditioning technique that pairs an unpleasant stimulant
      with an undesirable behavior ^
   behavior therapy
      therapeutic orientation that employs principles of learning to
      help clients change undesirable behaviors ^
   biomedical therapy
      treatment that involves medication and/or medical procedures to
      treat psychological disorders ^
   cognitive-behavioral therapy
      form of psychotherapy that aims to change cognitive distortions
      and self-defeating behaviors ^
   cognitive therapy
      form of psychotherapy that focuses on how a person’s thoughts lead
      to feelings of distress, with the aim of helping them change these
      irrational thoughts ^
   counterconditioning
      classical conditioning therapeutic technique in which a client
      learns a new response to a stimulus that has previously elicited
      an undesirable behavior ^
   dream analysis
      technique in psychoanalysis in which patients recall their dreams
      and the psychoanalyst interprets them to reveal unconscious
      desires or struggles ^
   electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
      type of biomedical therapy that involves using an electrical
      current to induce seizures in a person to help alleviate the
      effects of severe depression ^
   exposure therapy
      counterconditioning technique in which a therapist seeks to treat
      a client’s fear or anxiety by presenting the feared object or
      situation with the idea that the person will eventually get used
      to it ^
   free association
      technique in psychoanalysis in which the patient says whatever
      comes to mind at the moment ^
   humanistic therapy
      therapeutic orientation aimed at helping people become more
      self-aware and accepting of themselves ^
   nondirective therapy
      therapeutic approach in which the therapist does not give advice
      or provide interpretations but helps the person identify conflicts
      and understand feelings ^
   play therapy
      therapeutic process, often used with children, that employs toys
      to help them resolve psychological problems ^
   psychoanalysis
      therapeutic orientation developed by Sigmund Freud that employs
      free association, dream analysis, and transference to uncover
      repressed feelings ^
   psychotherapy
      (also, psychodynamic psychotherapy) psychological treatment that
      employs various methods to help someone overcome personal
      problems, or to attain personal growth ^
   rational emotive therapy (RET)
      form of cognitive-behavioral therapy ^
   Rogerian (client-centered therapy)
      non-directive form of humanistic psychotherapy developed by Carl
      Rogers that emphasizes unconditional positive regard and
      self-acceptance ^
   systematic desensitization
      form of exposure therapy used to treat phobias and anxiety
      disorders by exposing a person to the feared object or situation
      through a stimulus hierarchy ^
   token economy
      controlled setting where individuals are reinforced for desirable
      behaviors with tokens (e.g., poker chip) that be exchanged for
      items or privileges ^
   transference
      process in psychoanalysis in which the patient transfers all of
      the positive or negative emotions associated with the patient’s
      other relationships to the psychoanalyst ^
   unconditional positive regard
      fundamental acceptance of a person regardless of what they say or
      do; term associated with humanistic psychology ^
   virtual reality exposure therapy
      uses a simulation rather than the actual feared object or
      situation to help people conquer their fears

.. |This photograph shows what Freud’s famous psychoanalytic couch looked like. The couch is draped in tapestries and pillows, and the room is decorated with sculptures, books and pictures on the wall.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_16_02_FreudCouch.jpg
.. |This photograph shows a person playing with objects in a small box filled with sand. The person is organizing these objects and small play figures in a form of treatment called sandplay.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_16_02_Sandtray.jpg
.. |This figure, titled “Exposure Therapy,” illustrates the exposure therapy strategy of Mary Cover Jones to rid a person of the fear of rabbits. The first of four levels depicts an image of a person and a rabbit with an equals sign between them. Under the rabbit reads “conditioned stimulus (CS),” and under the person reads “fear of rabbits.” The second level depicts an image of milk and cookies, labeled “unconditioned stimulus (US),” and on the other side of an equals sign there is a picture of the same person labeled “unconditioned response (UR).” The third level shows the milk and cookies, labeled “unconditioned stimulus (US),” and rabbit, labeled “conditioned stimulus (CS),” to the left and right of a plus sign, with the person on the other side of an equals sign. The label “unconditioned response (UR) is below the person.” The final level shows the person and the rabbit separated by an equals sign. This time the rabbit is labeled “conditioned stimulus (CS)” and the person is labeled “conditioned response (CR).”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_16_02_Conditioning.jpg
.. |A close-up picture of a very large spider on a person’s arm is shown. The person is using its other hand to hold up two of the spider’s legs.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_16_02_Spider.jpg
.. |This graphic depicts two three-box flowcharts showing reactions to failing a test. The first flowchart flows from “Failed test” to “Internal beliefs: I’m worthless and stupid” to “Depression.” The second flowchart flows from “Failed test” to “Internal beliefs: I’m smart, but I didn’t study for this test. I can do better.” to “No depression.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_16_02_Cognitive.jpg
