====================
Treatment Modalities
====================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Distinguish
   between the various modalities of treatment \* Discuss benefits of
   group therapy

Once a person seeks treatment, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, he
has an **intake**\ {: data-type=“term”} done to assess his clinical
needs. An intake is the therapist’s first meeting with the client. The
therapist gathers specific information to address the client’s immediate
needs, such as the presenting problem, the client’s support system, and
insurance status. The therapist informs the client about
confidentiality, fees, and what to expect in treatment.
**Confidentiality**\ {: data-type=“term”} means the therapist cannot
disclose confidential communications to any third party unless mandated
or permitted by law to do so. During the intake, the therapist and
client will work together to discuss treatment goals. Then a treatment
plan will be formulated, usually with specific measurable objectives.
Also, the therapist and client will discuss how treatment success will
be measured and the estimated length of treatment. There are several
different modalities of treatment
(`[link] <#CNX_Psych_16_03_OneonOne>`__): Individual therapy, family
therapy, couples therapy, and group therapy are the most common.

|Two photographs are shown. Photograph A depicts two people in
conversation. Photograph B depicts a large group of people sitting in a
circle on the beach.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_16_03_OneonOne}

INDIVIDUAL THERAPY
==================

In **individual therapy**\ {: data-type=“term”}, also known as
individual psychotherapy or individual counseling, the client and
clinician meet one-on-one (usually from 45 minutes to 1 hour). These
meetings typically occur weekly or every other week, and sessions are
conducted in a confidential and caring environment
(`[link] <#CNX_Psych_16_03_HandHead>`__). The clinician will work with
clients to help them explore their feelings, work through life
challenges, identify aspects of themselves and their lives that they
wish to change, and set goals to help them work towards these changes. A
client might see a clinician for only a few sessions, or the client may
attend individual therapy sessions for a year or longer. The amount of
time spent in therapy depends on the needs of the client as well as her
personal goals.

|A photograph depicting a woman in a therapy session with her therapist
is shown.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_16_03_HandHead}

GROUP THERAPY
=============

In **group therapy**\ {: data-type=“term”}, a clinician meets together
with several clients with similar problems
(`[link] <#CNX_Psych_16_03_Group>`__). When children are placed in group
therapy, it is particularly important to match clients for age and
problems. One benefit of group therapy is that it can help decrease a
client’s shame and isolation about a problem while offering needed
support, both from the therapist and other members of the group
(American Psychological Association, 2014). A nine-year-old sexual abuse
victim, for example, may feel very embarrassed and ashamed. If he is
placed in a group with other sexually abused boys, he will realize that
he is not alone. A child struggling with poor social skills would likely
benefit from a group with a specific curriculum to foster special
skills. A woman suffering from post-partum depression could feel less
guilty and more supported by being in a group with similar women.

Group therapy also has some specific limitations. Members of the group
may be afraid to speak in front of other people because sharing secrets
and problems with complete strangers can be stressful and overwhelming.
There may be personality clashes and arguments among group members.
There could also be concerns about confidentiality: Someone from the
group might share what another participant said to people outside of the
group.

|A group of people arranged in a circle having a conversation is
shown.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_16_03_Group}

Another benefit of group therapy is that members can confront each other
about their patterns. For those with some types of problems, such as
sexual abusers, group therapy is the recommended treatment. Group
treatment for this population is considered to have several benefits:

Group treatment is more economical than individual, couples, or family
therapy. Sexual abusers often feel more comfortable admitting and
discussing their offenses in a treatment group where others are modeling
openness. Clients often accept feedback about their behavior more
willingly from other group members than from therapists. Finally,
clients can practice social skills in group treatment settings.
(McGrath, Cumming, Burchard, Zeoli, & Ellerby, 2009)

Groups that have a strong educational component are called
psycho-educational groups. For example, a group for children whose
parents have cancer might discuss in depth what cancer is, types of
treatment for cancer, and the side effects of treatments, such as hair
loss. Often, group therapy sessions with children take place in school.
They are led by a school counselor, a school psychologist, or a school
social worker. Groups might focus on test anxiety, social isolation,
self-esteem, bullying, or school failure (Shechtman, 2002). Whether the
group is held in school or in a clinician’s office, group therapy has
been found to be effective with children facing numerous kinds of
challenges (Shechtman, 2002).

During a group session, the entire group could reflect on an
individual’s problem or difficulties, and others might disclose what
they have done in that situation. When a clinician is facilitating a
group, the focus is always on making sure that everyone benefits and
participates in the group and that no one person is the focus of the
entire session. Groups can be organized in various ways: some have an
overarching theme or purpose, some are time-limited, some have open
membership that allows people to come and go, and some are closed. Some
groups are structured with planned activities and goals, while others
are unstructured: There is no specific plan, and group members
themselves decide how the group will spend its time and on what goals it
will focus. This can become a complex and emotionally charged process,
but it is also an opportunity for personal growth (Page & Berkow, 1994).

COUPLES THERAPY
===============

**Couples therapy**\ {: data-type=“term”} involves two people in an
intimate relationship who are having difficulties and are trying to
resolve them (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_16_02_Cognitive>`__). The couple may
be dating, partnered, engaged, or married. The primary therapeutic
orientation used in couples counseling is cognitive-behavioral therapy
(Rathus & Sanderson, 1999). Couples meet with a therapist to discuss
conflicts and/or aspects of their relationship that they want to change.
The therapist helps them see how their individual backgrounds, beliefs,
and actions are affecting their relationship. Often, a therapist tries
to help the couple resolve these problems, as well as implement
strategies that will lead to a healthier and happier relationship, such
as how to listen, how to argue, and how to express feelings. However,
sometimes, after working with a therapist, a couple will realize that
they are too incompatible and will decide to separate. Some couples seek
therapy to work out their problems, while others attend therapy to
determine whether staying together is the best solution. Counseling
couples in a high-conflict and volatile relationship can be difficult.
In fact, psychologists Peter Pearson and Ellyn Bader, who founded the
Couples Institute in Palo Alto, California, have compared the experience
of the clinician in couples’ therapy to be like “piloting a helicopter
in a hurricane” (Weil, 2012, para. 7).

|A photograph shows two people talking to a third person.|\ {:
#CNX_Psych_16_02_Cognitive}

FAMILY THERAPY
==============

**Family therapy**\ {: data-type=“term”} is a special form of group
therapy, consisting of one or more families. Although there are many
theoretical orientations in family therapy, one of the most predominant
is the systems approach. The family is viewed as an organized system,
and each individual within the family is a contributing member who
creates and maintains processes within the system that shape behavior
(Minuchin, 1985). Each member of the family influences and is influenced
by the others. The goal of this approach is to enhance the growth of
each family member as well as that of the family as a whole.

Often, dysfunctional patterns of communication that develop between
family members can lead to conflict. A family with this dynamic might
wish to attend therapy together rather than individually. In many cases,
one member of the family has problems that detrimentally affect
everyone. For example, a mother’s depression, teen daughter’s eating
disorder, or father’s alcohol dependence could affect all members of the
family. The therapist would work with all members of the family to help
them cope with the issue, and to encourage resolution and growth in the
case of the individual family member with the problem.

With family therapy, the nuclear family (i.e., parents and children) or
the nuclear family plus whoever lives in the household (e.g.,
grandparent) come into treatment. Family therapists work with the whole
family unit to heal the family. There are several different types of
family therapy. In **structural family therapy**\ {: data-type=“term”},
the therapist examines and discusses the boundaries and structure of the
family: who makes the rules, who sleeps in the bed with whom, how
decisions are made, and what are the boundaries within the family. In
some families, the parents do not work together to make rules, or one
parent may undermine the other, leading the children to act out. The
therapist helps them resolve these issues and learn to communicate more
effectively.

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Watch this `video <http://openstax.org/l/Sfamily>`__ to view a
   structural family session.

In **strategic family therapy**\ {: data-type=“term”}, the goal is to
address specific problems within the family that can be dealt with in a
relatively short amount of time. Typically, the therapist would guide
what happens in the therapy session and design a detailed approach to
resolving each member’s problem (Madanes, 1991).

Summary
=======

There are several modalities of treatment: individual therapy, group
therapy, couples therapy, and family therapy are the most common. In an
individual therapy session, a client works one-on-one with a trained
therapist. In group therapy, usually 5–10 people meet with a trained
group therapist to discuss a common issue (e.g., divorce, grief, eating
disorders, substance abuse, or anger management). Couples therapy
involves two people in an intimate relationship who are having
difficulties and are trying to resolve them. The couple may be dating,
partnered, engaged, or married. The therapist helps them resolve their
problems as well as implement strategies that will lead to a healthier
and happier relationship. Family therapy is a special form of group
therapy. The therapy group is made up of one or more families. The goal
of this approach is to enhance the growth of each individual family
member and the family as a whole.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      A treatment modality in which 5–10 people with the same issue or
      concern meet together with a trained clinician is known as
      \________.

      1. family therapy
      2. couples therapy
      3. group therapy
      4. self-help group {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      What happens during an intake?

      1. The therapist gathers specific information to address the
         client’s immediate needs such as the presenting problem, the
         client’s support system, and insurance status. The therapist
         informs the client about confidentiality, fees, and what to
         expect in a therapy session.
      2. The therapist guides what happens in the therapy session and
         designs a detailed approach to resolving each member’s
         presenting problem.
      3. The therapist meets with a couple to help them see how their
         individual backgrounds, beliefs, and actions are affecting
         their relationship.
      4. The therapist examines and discusses with the family the
         boundaries and structure of the family: For example, who makes
         the rules, who sleeps in the bed with whom, and how decisions
         are made. {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

Critical Thinking Question
==========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Compare and contrast individual and group therapies.

   .. container::

      In an individual therapy session, a client works one-on-one with a
      trained therapist. In group therapy, usually 5–10 people meet with
      a trained group therapist to discuss a common issue, such as
      divorce, grief, eating disorder, substance abuse, or anger
      management.

Personal Application
====================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Your best friend tells you that she is concerned about her cousin.
      The cousin—a teenage girl—is constantly coming home after her
      curfew, and your friend suspects that she has been drinking. What
      treatment modality would you recommend to your friend and why?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   confidentiality
      therapist cannot disclose confidential communications to any third
      party, unless mandated or permitted by law ^
   couples therapy
      two people in an intimate relationship, such as husband and wife,
      who are having difficulties and are trying to resolve them with
      therapy ^
   family therapy
      special form of group therapy consisting of one or more families ^
   group therapy
      treatment modality in which 5–10 people with the same issue or
      concern meet together with a trained clinician ^
   individual therapy
      treatment modality in which the client and clinician meet
      one-on-one ^
   intake
      therapist’s first meeting with the client in which the therapist
      gathers specific information to address the client’s immediate
      needs ^
   strategic family therapy
      therapist guides the therapy sessions and develops treatment plans
      for each family member for specific problems that can addressed in
      a short amount of time ^
   structural family therapy
      therapist examines and discusses with the family the boundaries
      and structure of the family: who makes the rules, who sleeps in
      the bed with whom, how decisions are made, and what are the
      boundaries within the family

.. |Two photographs are shown. Photograph A depicts two people in conversation. Photograph B depicts a large group of people sitting in a circle on the beach.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_16_03_OneonOne.jpg
.. |A photograph depicting a woman in a therapy session with her therapist is shown.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_16_03_HandHead.jpg
.. |A group of people arranged in a circle having a conversation is shown.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_16_03_Groupn.jpg
.. |A photograph shows two people talking to a third person.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_16_03_Couple.jpg
