======================
Dissociative Disorders
======================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Describe the
   essential nature of dissociative disorders \* Identify and
   differentiate the symptoms of dissociative amnesia,
   depersonalization/ derealization disorder, and dissociative identity
   disorder \* Discuss the potential role of both social and
   psychological factors in dissociative identity disorder

**Dissociative disorders**\ {: data-type=“term”} are characterized by an
individual becoming split off, or dissociated, from her core sense of
self. Memory and identity become disturbed; these disturbances have a
psychological rather than physical cause. Dissociative disorders listed
in the DSM-5 include dissociative amnesia,
depersonalization/derealization disorder, and dissociative identity
disorder.

DISSOCIATIVE AMNESIA
====================

Amnesia refers to the partial or total forgetting of some experience or
event. An individual with **dissociative amnesia**\ {: data-type=“term”}
is unable to recall important personal information, usually following an
extremely stressful or traumatic experience such as combat, natural
disasters, or being the victim of violence. The memory impairments are
not caused by ordinary forgetting. Some individuals with dissociative
amnesia will also experience **dissociative fugue**\ {:
data-type=“term”} (from the word “to flee” in French), whereby they
suddenly wander away from their home, experience confusion about their
identity, and sometimes even adopt a new identity (Cardeña & Gleaves,
2006). Most fugue episodes last only a few hours or days, but some can
last longer. One study of residents in communities in upstate New York
reported that about 1.8% experienced dissociative amnesia in the
previous year (Johnson, Cohen, Kasen, & Brook, 2006).

Some have questioned the validity of dissociative amnesia (Pope, Hudson,
Bodkin, & Oliva, 1998); it has even been characterized as a “piece of
psychiatric folklore devoid of convincing empirical support” (McNally,
2003, p. 275). Notably, scientific publications regarding dissociative
amnesia rose during the 1980s and reached a peak in the mid-1990s,
followed by an equally sharp decline by 2003; in fact, only 13 cases of
individuals with dissociative amnesia worldwide could be found in the
literature that same year (Pope, Barry, Bodkin, & Hudson, 2006).
Further, no description of individuals showing dissociative amnesia
following a trauma exists in any fictional or nonfictional work prior to
1800 (Pope, Poliakoff, Parker, Boynes, & Hudson, 2006). However, a study
of 82 individuals who enrolled for treatment at a psychiatric outpatient
hospital found that nearly 10% met the criteria for dissociative
amnesia, perhaps suggesting that the condition is underdiagnosed,
especially in psychiatric populations (Foote, Smolin, Kaplan, Legatt, &
Lipschitz, 2006).

DEPERSONALIZATION/DEREALIZATION DISORDER
========================================

**Depersonalization/derealization disorder**\ {: data-type=“term”} is
characterized by recurring episodes of depersonalization, derealization,
or both. Depersonalization is defined as feelings of “unreality or
detachment from, or unfamiliarity with, one’s whole self or from aspects
of the self” (APA, 2013, p. 302). Individuals who experience
**depersonalization**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} might believe
their thoughts and feelings are not their own; they may feel robotic as
though they lack control over their movements and speech; they may
experience a distorted sense of time and, in extreme cases, they may
sense an “out-of-body” experience in which they see themselves from the
vantage point of another person. **Derealization**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis} is conceptualized as a sense of “unreality or detachment
from, or unfamiliarity with, the world, be it individuals, inanimate
objects, or all surroundings” (APA, 2013, p. 303). A person who
experiences derealization might feel as though he is in a fog or a
dream, or that the surrounding world is somehow artificial and unreal.
Individuals with depersonalization/derealization disorder often have
difficulty describing their symptoms and may think they are going crazy
(APA, 2013).

DISSOCIATIVE IDENTITY DISORDER
==============================

By far, the most well-known dissociative disorder is **dissociative
identity disorder**\ {: data-type=“term”} (formerly called multiple
personality disorder). People with dissociative identity disorder
exhibit two or more separate personalities or identities, each
well-defined and distinct from one another. They also experience memory
gaps for the time during which another identity is in charge (e.g., one
might find unfamiliar items in her shopping bags or among her
possessions), and in some cases may report hearing voices, such as a
child’s voice or the sound of somebody crying (APA, 2013). The study of
upstate New York residents mentioned above (Johnson et al., 2006)
reported that 1.5% of their sample experienced symptoms consistent with
dissociative identity disorder in the previous year.

Dissociative identity disorder (DID) is highly controversial. Some
believe that people fake symptoms to avoid the consequences of illegal
actions (e.g., “I am not responsible for shoplifting because it was my
other personality”). In fact, it has been demonstrated that people are
generally skilled at adopting the role of a person with different
personalities when they believe it might be advantageous to do so. As an
example, Kenneth Bianchi was an infamous serial killer who, along with
his cousin, murdered over a dozen females around Los Angeles in the late
1970s. Eventually, he and his cousin were apprehended. At Bianchi’s
trial, he pled not guilty by reason of insanity, presenting himself as
though he had DID and claiming that a different personality (“Steve
Walker”) committed the murders. When these claims were scrutinized, he
admitted faking the symptoms and was found guilty (Schwartz, 1981).

A second reason DID is controversial is because rates of the disorder
suddenly skyrocketed in the 1980s. More cases of DID were identified
during the five years prior to 1986 than in the preceding two centuries
(Putnam, Guroff, Silberman, Barban, & Post, 1986). Although this
increase may be due to the development of more sophisticated diagnostic
techniques, it is also possible that the popularization of DID—helped in
part by *Sybil*, a popular 1970s book (and later film) about a woman
with 16 different personalities—may have prompted clinicians to
overdiagnose the disorder (Piper & Merskey, 2004). Casting further
scrutiny on the existence of multiple personalities or identities is the
recent suggestion that the story of Sybil was largely fabricated, and
the idea for the book might have been exaggerated (Nathan, 2011).

Despite its controversial nature, DID is clearly a legitimate and
serious disorder, and although some people may fake symptoms, others
suffer their entire lives with it. People with this disorder tend to
report a history of childhood trauma, some cases having been
corroborated through medical or legal records (Cardeña & Gleaves, 2006).
Research by Ross et al. (1990) suggests that in one study about 95% of
people with DID were physically and/or sexually abused as children. Of
course, not all reports of childhood abuse can be expected to be valid
or accurate. However, there is strong evidence that traumatic
experiences can cause people to experience states of dissociation,
suggesting that dissociative states—including the adoption of multiple
personalities—may serve as a psychologically important coping mechanism
for threat and danger (Dalenberg et al., 2012).

Summary
=======

The main characteristic of dissociative disorders is that people become
dissociated from their sense of self, resulting in memory and identity
disturbances. Dissociative disorders listed in the DSM-5 include
dissociative amnesia, depersonalization/derealization disorder, and
dissociative identity disorder. A person with dissociative amnesia is
unable to recall important personal information, often after a stressful
or traumatic experience.

Depersonalization/derealization disorder is characterized by recurring
episodes of depersonalization (i.e., detachment from or unfamiliarity
with the self) and/or derealization (i.e., detachment from or
unfamiliarity with the world). A person with dissociative identity
disorder exhibits two or more well-defined and distinct personalities or
identities, as well as memory gaps for the time during which another
identity was present.

Dissociative identity disorder has generated controversy, mainly because
some believe its symptoms can be faked by patients if presenting its
symptoms somehow benefits the patient in avoiding negative consequences
or taking responsibility for one’s actions. The diagnostic rates of this
disorder have increased dramatically following its portrayal in popular
culture. However, many people legitimately suffer over the course of a
lifetime with this disorder.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Dissociative amnesia involves \________.

      1. memory loss following head trauma
      2. memory loss following stress
      3. feeling detached from the self
      4. feeling detached from the world {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      Dissociative identity disorder mainly involves \________.

      1. depersonalization
      2. derealization
      3. schizophrenia
      4. different personalities {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

Critical Thinking Question
==========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      The prevalence of most psychological disorders has increased since
      the 1980s. However, as discussed in this section, scientific
      publications regarding dissociative amnesia peaked in the
      mid-1990s but then declined steeply through 2003. In addition, no
      fictional or nonfictional description of individuals showing
      dissociative amnesia following a trauma exists prior to 1800. How
      would you explain this phenomenon?

   .. container::

      Several explanations are possible. One explanation is that perhaps
      there is little scientific interest in this phenomenon, maybe
      because it has yet to gain consistent scientific acceptance.
      Another possible explanation is that perhaps the dissociative
      amnesia was fashionable at the time publications dealing with this
      topic peaked (1990s); perhaps since that time it has become less
      fashionable.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Try to find an example (via a search engine) of a past instance in
      which a person committed a horrible crime, was apprehended, and
      later claimed to have dissociative identity disorder during the
      trial. What was the outcome? Was the person revealed to be faking?
      If so, how was this determined?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   depersonalization/derealization disorder
      dissociative disorder in which people feel detached from the self
      (depersonalization), and the world feels artificial and unreal
      (derealization) ^
   dissociative amnesia
      dissociative disorder characterized by an inability to recall
      important personal information, usually following an extremely
      stressful or traumatic experience ^
   dissociative disorders
      group of DSM-5 disorders in which the primary feature is that a
      person becomes dissociated, or split off, from his or her core
      sense of self, resulting in disturbances in identity and memory ^
   dissociative fugue
      symptom of dissociative amnesia in which a person suddenly wanders
      away from one’s home and experiences confusion about his or her
      identity ^
   dissociative identity disorder
      dissociative disorder (formerly known as multiple personality
      disorder) in which a person exhibits two or more distinct,
      well-defined personalities or identities and experiences memory
      gaps for the time during which another identity emerged
