==================
Stress and Illness
==================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Explain the
   nature of psychophysiological disorders \* Describe the immune system
   and how stress impacts its functioning \* Describe how stress and
   emotional factors can lead to the development and exacerbation of
   cardiovascular disorders, asthma, and tension headaches

In this section, we will discuss **stress**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis} and illness. As stress researcher Robert Sapolsky (1998)
describes,

   stress-related disease emerges, predominantly, out of the fact that
   we so often activate a physiological system that has evolved for
   responding to acute physical emergencies, but we turn it on for
   months on end, worrying about mortgages, relationships, and
   promotions. (p. 6)

The stress response, as noted earlier, consists of a coordinated but
complex system of physiological reactions that are called upon as
needed. These reactions are beneficial at times because they prepare us
to deal with potentially dangerous or threatening situations (for
example, recall our old friend, the fearsome bear on the trail).
However, health is affected when physiological reactions are sustained,
as can happen in response to ongoing stress.

PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL DISORDERS
=============================

If the reactions that compose the stress response are chronic or if they
frequently exceed normal ranges, they can lead to cumulative wear and
tear on the body, in much the same way that running your air conditioner
on full blast all summer will eventually cause wear and tear on it. For
example, the high blood pressure that a person under considerable job
strain experiences might eventually take a toll on his heart and set the
stage for a heart attack or heart failure. Also, someone exposed to high
levels of the stress hormone cortisol might become vulnerable to
infection or disease because of weakened immune system functioning
(McEwen, 1998).

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Robert Sapolsky, a noted Stanford University neurobiologist and
   professor, has for over 30 years conducted extensive research on
   stress, its impact on our bodies, and how psychological tumult can
   escalate stress—even in baboons. Here are two videos featuring
   Dr. Sapolsky: one is regarding `killer
   stress <http://openstax.org/l/sapolsky1>`__ and the other is an
   excellent `in-depth documentary <http://openstax.org/l/sapolsky2>`__
   from *National Geographic*.

Physical disorders or diseases whose symptoms are brought about or
worsened by stress and emotional factors are called
**psychophysiological disorders**\ {: data-type=“term”}. The physical
symptoms of psychophysiological disorders are real and they can be
produced or exacerbated by psychological factors (hence the *psycho* and
*physiological* in psychophysiological). A list of frequently
encountered psychophysiological disorders is provided in
`[link] <#Table_14_03_01>`__.

.. raw:: html

   <table id="Table_14_03_01" summary="A table shows examples of types of psychophysiological disorders. The first column of the first row is labeled “Types of Psychophysiological Disorder” and the second column is labeled “Examples.” Beginning with the second row, cardiovascular disorder examples are hypertension, and coronary heart disease. A gastrointestinal disorder example is irritable bowel syndrome. Respiratory disorder examples are asthma and allergy. Musculoskeletal disorder examples are low back pain and tension headaches. Skin disorder examples are acne, eczema, and psoriasis.">

.. raw:: html

   <caption>

Types of Psychophysiological Disorders (adapted from Everly & Lating,
2002)

.. raw:: html

   </caption>

.. raw:: html

   <thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th data-align="center">

Type of Psychophysiological Disorder

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th data-align="center">

Examples

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tbody>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Cardiovascular

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

hypertension, coronary heart disease

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Gastrointestinal

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

irritable bowel syndrome

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Respiratory

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

asthma, allergy

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Musculoskeletal

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

low back pain, tension headaches

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Skin

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

acne, eczema, psoriasis

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </tbody>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

In addition to stress itself, emotional upset and certain stressful
personality traits have been proposed as potential contributors to ill
health. Franz Alexander (1950), an early-20th-century psychoanalyst and
physician, once postulated that various diseases are caused by specific
unconscious conflicts. For example, he linked hypertension to repressed
anger, asthma to separation anxiety, and ulcers to an unconscious desire
to “remain in the dependent infantile situation—to be loved and cared
for” (Alexander, 1950, p. 102). Although hypertension does appear to be
linked to anger (as you will learn below), Alexander’s assertions have
not been supported by research. Years later, Friedman and Booth-Kewley
(1987), after statistically reviewing 101 studies examining the link
between personality and illness, proposed the existence of disease-prone
personality characteristics, including depression, anger/hostility, and
anxiety. Indeed, a study of over 61,000 Norwegians identified depression
as a risk factor for all major disease-related causes of death (Mykletun
et al., 2007). In addition, neuroticism—a personality trait that
reflects how anxious, moody, and sad one is—has been identified as a
risk factor for chronic health problems and mortality (Ploubidis &
Grundy, 2009).

Below, we discuss two kinds of psychophysiological disorders about which
a great deal is known: cardiovascular disorders and asthma. First,
however, it is necessary to turn our attention to a discussion of the
immune system—one of the major pathways through which stress and
emotional factors can lead to illness and disease.

STRESS AND THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
============================

In a sense, the **immune system**\ {: data-type=“term”} is the body’s
surveillance system. It consists of a variety of structures, cells, and
mechanisms that serve to protect the body from invading toxins and
microorganisms that can harm or damage the body’s tissues and organs.
When the immune system is working as it should, it keeps us healthy and
disease free by eliminating bacteria, viruses, and other foreign
substances that have entered the body (Everly & Lating, 2002).

Immune System Errors
--------------------

Sometimes, the immune system will function erroneously. For example,
sometimes it can go awry by mistaking your body’s own healthy cells for
invaders and repeatedly attacking them. When this happens, the person is
said to have an autoimmune disease, which can affect almost any part of
the body. How an autoimmune disease affects a person depends on what
part of the body is targeted. For instance, rheumatoid arthritis, an
autoimmune disease that affects the joints, results in joint pain,
stiffness, and loss of function. Systemic lupus erythematosus, an
autoimmune disease that affects the skin, can result in rashes and
swelling of the skin. Grave’s disease, an autoimmune disease that
affects the thyroid gland, can result in fatigue, weight gain, and
muscle aches (National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and
Skin Diseases [NIAMS], 2012).

In addition, the immune system may sometimes break down and be unable to
do its job. This situation is referred to as **immunosuppression**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, the decreased effectiveness of the immune system.
When people experience immunosuppression, they become susceptible to any
number of infections, illness, and diseases. For example, acquired
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a serious and lethal disease that
is caused by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which greatly weakens
the immune system by infecting and destroying antibody-producing cells,
thus rendering a person vulnerable to any of a number of opportunistic
infections (Powell, 1996).

Stressors and Immune Function
-----------------------------

The question of whether stress and negative emotional states can
influence immune function has captivated researchers for over three
decades, and discoveries made over that time have dramatically changed
the face of health psychology (Kiecolt-Glaser, 2009).
**Psychoneuroimmunology**\ {: data-type=“term”} is the field that
studies how psychological factors such as stress influence the immune
system and immune functioning. The term psychoneuroimmunology was first
coined in 1981, when it appeared as the title of a book that reviewed
available evidence for associations between the brain, endocrine system,
and immune system (Zacharie, 2009). To a large extent, this field
evolved from the discovery that there is a connection between the
central nervous system and the immune system.

Some of the most compelling evidence for a connection between the brain
and the immune system comes from studies in which researchers
demonstrated that immune responses in animals could be classically
conditioned (Everly & Lating, 2002). For example, Ader and Cohen (1975)
paired flavored water (the conditioned stimulus) with the presentation
of an immunosuppressive drug (the unconditioned stimulus), causing
sickness (an unconditioned response). Not surprisingly, rats exposed to
this pairing developed a conditioned aversion to the flavored water.
However, the taste of the water itself later produced immunosuppression
(a conditioned response), indicating that the immune system itself had
been conditioned. Many subsequent studies over the years have further
demonstrated that immune responses can be classically conditioned in
both animals and humans (Ader & Cohen, 2001). Thus, if classical
conditioning can alter immunity, other psychological factors should be
capable of altering it as well.

Hundreds of studies involving tens of thousands of participants have
tested many kinds of brief and chronic stressors and their effect on the
immune system (e.g., public speaking, medical school examinations,
unemployment, marital discord, divorce, death of spouse, burnout and job
strain, caring for a relative with Alzheimer’s disease, and exposure to
the harsh climate of Antarctica). It has been repeatedly demonstrated
that many kinds of stressors are associated with poor or weakened immune
functioning (Glaser & Kiecolt-Glaser, 2005; Kiecolt-Glaser, McGuire,
Robles, & Glaser, 2002; Segerstrom & Miller, 2004).

When evaluating these findings, it is important to remember that there
is a tangible physiological connection between the brain and the immune
system. For example, the sympathetic nervous system innervates immune
organs such as the thymus, bone marrow, spleen, and even lymph nodes
(Maier, Watkins, & Fleshner, 1994). Also, we noted earlier that stress
hormones released during hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis
activation can adversely impact immune function. One way they do this is
by inhibiting the production of **lymphocytes**\ {: data-type=“term”},
white blood cells that circulate in the body’s fluids that are important
in the immune response (Everly & Lating, 2002).

Some of the more dramatic examples demonstrating the link between stress
and impaired immune function involve studies in which volunteers were
exposed to viruses. The rationale behind this research is that because
stress weakens the immune system, people with high stress levels should
be more likely to develop an illness compared to those under little
stress. In one memorable experiment using this method, researchers
interviewed 276 healthy volunteers about recent stressful experiences
(Cohen et al., 1998). Following the interview, these participants were
given nasal drops containing the cold virus (in case you are wondering
why anybody would ever want to participate in a study in which they are
subjected to such treatment, the participants were paid $800 for their
trouble). When examined later, participants who reported experiencing
chronic stressors for more than one month—especially enduring
difficulties involving work or relationships—were considerably more
likely to have developed colds than were participants who reported no
chronic stressors (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_14_03_StressCold>`__).

|A bar graph shows the relationship between chronic stressors and the
percentage of people who developed colds after receiving the cold virus.
About 50% of people with chronic stressors for at least one month
developed a cold compared to about 35% without chronic stressors. About
52% of people with chronic stressors for at least three months developed
a cold compared to about 35% without chronic stressors. About 51% of
people with chronic stressors for at least six months developed a cold
compared to about 35% without chronic stressors.|\ {:
#CNX_Psych_14_03_StressCold}

In another study, older volunteers were given an influenza virus
vaccination. Compared to controls, those who were caring for a spouse
with Alzheimer’s disease (and thus were under chronic stress) showed
poorer antibody response following the vaccination (Kiecolt-Glaser,
Glaser, Gravenstein, Malarkey, & Sheridan, 1996).

Other studies have demonstrated that stress slows down wound healing by
impairing immune responses important to wound repair (Glaser &
Kiecolt-Glaser, 2005). In one study, for example, skin blisters were
induced on the forearm. Subjects who reported higher levels of stress
produced lower levels of immune proteins necessary for wound healing
(Glaser et al., 1999). Stress, then, is not so much the sword that kills
the knight, so to speak; rather, it’s the sword that breaks the knight’s
shield, and your immune system is that shield.

.. container:: psychology dig-deeper

   .. container::

      Stress and Aging: A Tale of Telomeres

   Have you ever wondered why people who are stressed often seem to have
   a haggard look about them? A pioneering study from 2004 suggests that
   the reason is because stress can actually accelerate the cell biology
   of aging.

   Stress, it seems, can shorten telomeres, which are segments of DNA
   that protect the ends of chromosomes. Shortened telomeres can inhibit
   or block cell division, which includes growth and proliferation of
   new cells, thereby leading to more rapid aging (Sapolsky, 2004). In
   the study, researchers compared **telomere**\ {: data-type=“term”
   .no-emphasis} lengths in the white blood cells in mothers of
   chronically ill children to those of mothers of healthy children
   (Epel et al., 2004). Mothers of chronically ill children would be
   expected to experience more stress than would mothers of healthy
   children. The longer a mother had spent caring for her ill child, the
   shorter her telomeres (the correlation between years of caregiving
   and telomere length was *r* = -.40). In addition, higher levels of
   perceived stress were negatively correlated with telomere size (*r* =
   -.31). These researchers also found that the average telomere length
   of the most stressed mothers, compared to the least stressed, was
   similar to what you would find in people who were 9–17 years older
   than they were on average.

   Numerous other studies since have continued to find associations
   between stress and eroded telomeres (Blackburn & Epel, 2012). Some
   studies have even demonstrated that stress can begin to erode
   telomeres in childhood and perhaps even before children are born. For
   example, childhood exposure to violence (e.g., maternal domestic
   violence, bullying victimization, and physical maltreatment) was
   found in one study to accelerate telomere erosion from ages 5 to 10
   (Shalev et al., 2013). Another study reported that young adults whose
   mothers had experienced severe stress during their pregnancy had
   shorter telomeres than did those whose mothers had stress-free and
   uneventful pregnancies (Entringer et al., 2011). Further, the
   corrosive effects of childhood stress on telomeres can extend into
   young adulthood. In an investigation of over 4,000 U.K. women ages
   41–80, adverse experiences during childhood (e.g., physical abuse,
   being sent away from home, and parent divorce) were associated with
   shortened telomere length (Surtees et al., 2010), and telomere size
   decreased as the amount of experienced adversity increased
   (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_14_03_Telomeres>`__).

   |A bar graph shows the relationship between telomere length in
   kilobase pairs and the number of adversities people experienced.
   Those who experienced zero adversities had about 6.6 kilobase pairs
   for telomere size. Those who experienced one adversity had about 6.4
   kilobase pairs for telomere size. Those who experienced more than one
   adversity had about 5.9 kilobase pairs for telomere size.|\ {:
   #CNX_Psych_14_03_Telomeres}

   Efforts to dissect the precise cellular and physiological mechanisms
   linking short telomeres to stress and disease are currently underway.
   For the time being, telomeres provide us with yet another reminder
   that stress, especially during early life, can be just as harmful to
   our health as smoking or fast food (Blackburn & Epel, 2012).

CARDIOVASCULAR DISORDERS
========================

The cardiovascular system is composed of the heart and blood circulation
system. For many years, disorders that involve the cardiovascular
system—known as **cardiovascular disorders**\ {: data-type=“term”}—have
been a major focal point in the study of psychophysiological disorders
because of the cardiovascular system’s centrality in the stress response
(Everly & Lating, 2002). **Heart disease** is one such condition. Each
year, heart disease causes approximately one in three deaths in the
United States, and it is the leading cause of death in the developed
world (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2011; Shapiro,
2005).

The symptoms of heart disease vary somewhat depending on the specific
kind of heart disease one has, but they generally involve angina—chest
pains or discomfort that occur when the heart does not receive enough
blood (Office on Women’s Health, 2009). The pain often feels like the
chest is being pressed or squeezed; burning sensations in the chest and
shortness of breath are also commonly reported. Such pain and discomfort
can spread to the arms, neck, jaws, stomach (as nausea), and back
(American Heart Association [AHA], 2012a)
(`[link] <#CNX_Psych_14_03_Symptoms>`__).

|A figure showing outlines of the male and female bodies indicates
common heart attack symptoms for each sex. For males, these include
lightheadedness, perspiration, chest pain and pressure, stomach pain,
and shortness of breath. For females, these include dizziness, anxiety,
back and neck pain, shortness of breath, nausea and vomiting.|\ {:
#CNX_Psych_14_03_Symptoms}

A major risk factor for heart disease is **hypertension**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, which is high blood pressure. Hypertension forces a
person’s heart to pump harder, thus putting more physical strain on the
heart. If left unchecked, hypertension can lead to a heart attack,
stroke, or heart failure; it can also lead to kidney failure and
blindness. Hypertension is a serious cardiovascular disorder, and it is
sometimes called the silent killer because it has no symptoms—one who
has high blood pressure may not even be aware of it (AHA, 2012b).

Many risk factors contributing to cardiovascular disorders have been
identified. These risk factors include social determinants such as
aging, income, education, and employment status, as well as behavioral
risk factors that include unhealthy diet, tobacco use, physical
inactivity, and excessive alcohol consumption; obesity and diabetes are
additional risk factors (World Health Organization [WHO], 2013).

Over the past few decades, there has been much greater recognition and
awareness of the importance of stress and other psychological factors in
cardiovascular health (Nusair, Al-dadah, & Kumar, 2012). Indeed,
exposure to stressors of many kinds has also been linked to
cardiovascular problems; in the case of hypertension, some of these
stressors include job strain (Trudel, Brisson, & Milot, 2010), natural
disasters (Saito, Kim, Maekawa, Ikeda, & Yokoyama, 1997), marital
conflict (Nealey-Moore, Smith, Uchino, Hawkins, & Olson-Cerny, 2007),
and exposure to high traffic noise levels at one’s home (de Kluizenaar,
Gansevoort, Miedema, & de Jong, 2007). Perceived discrimination appears
to be associated with hypertension among African Americans (Sims et al.,
2012). In addition, laboratory-based stress tasks, such as performing
mental arithmetic under time pressure, immersing one’s hand into ice
water (known as the cold pressor test), mirror tracing, and public
speaking have all been shown to elevate blood pressure (Phillips, 2011).

ARE YOU TYPE A OR TYPE B?
=========================

Sometimes research ideas and theories emerge from seemingly trivial
observations. In the 1950s, cardiologist Meyer Friedman was looking over
his waiting room furniture, which consisted of upholstered chairs with
armrests. Friedman decided to have these chairs reupholstered. When the
man doing the reupholstering came to the office to do the work, he
commented on how the chairs were worn in a unique manner—the front edges
of the cushions were worn down, as were the front tips of the arm rests.
It seemed like the cardiology patients were tapping or squeezing the
front of the armrests, as well as literally sitting on the edge of their
seats (Friedman & Rosenman, 1974). Were cardiology patients somehow
different than other types of patients? If so, how?

After researching this matter, Friedman and his colleague, Ray Rosenman,
came to understand that people who are prone to heart disease tend to
think, feel, and act differently than those who are not. These
individuals tend to be intensively driven workaholics who are
preoccupied with deadlines and always seem to be in a rush. According to
Friedman and Rosenman, these individuals exhibit **Type A**\ {:
data-type=“term”} behavior pattern; those who are more relaxed and
laid-back were characterized as **Type B**\ {: data-type=“term”}
(`[link] <#CNX_Psych_14_03_TypeAB>`__). In a sample of Type As and Type
Bs, Friedman and Rosenman were startled to discover that heart disease
was over seven times more frequent among the Type As than the Type Bs
(Friedman & Rosenman, 1959).

|Photograph A is a distorted image of a person, head in hand, who
appears stressed. Photograph B shows a barefoot person lying down on a
blanket in the grass.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_14_03_TypeAB}

The major components of the Type A pattern include an aggressive and
chronic struggle to achieve more and more in less and less time
(Friedman & Rosenman, 1974). Specific characteristics of the Type A
pattern include an excessive competitive drive, chronic sense of time
urgency, impatience, and hostility toward others (particularly those who
get in the person’s way).

An example of a person who exhibits Type A behavior pattern is Jeffrey.
Even as a child, Jeffrey was intense and driven. He excelled at school,
was captain of the swim team, and graduated with honors from an Ivy
League college. Jeffrey never seems able to relax; he is always working
on something, even on the weekends. However, Jeffrey always seems to
feel as though there are not enough hours in the day to accomplish all
he feels he should. He volunteers to take on extra tasks at work and
often brings his work home with him; he often goes to bed angry late at
night because he feels that he has not done enough. Jeffrey is quick
tempered with his coworkers; he often becomes noticeably agitated when
dealing with those coworkers he feels work too slowly or whose work does
not meet his standards. He typically reacts with hostility when
interrupted at work. He has experienced problems in his marriage over
his lack of time spent with family. When caught in traffic during his
commute to and from work, Jeffrey incessantly pounds on his horn and
swears loudly at other drivers. When Jeffrey was 52, he suffered his
first heart attack.

By the 1970s, a majority of practicing cardiologists believed that Type
A behavior pattern was a significant risk factor for heart disease
(Friedman, 1977). Indeed, a number of early longitudinal investigations
demonstrated a link between Type A behavior pattern and later
development of heart disease (Rosenman et al., 1975; Haynes, Feinleib, &
Kannel, 1980).

Subsequent research examining the association between Type A and heart
disease, however, failed to replicate these earlier findings (Glassman,
2007; Myrtek, 2001). Because Type A theory did not pan out as well as
they had hoped, researchers shifted their attention toward determining
if any of the specific elements of Type A predict heart disease.

Extensive research clearly suggests that the anger/hostility dimension
of Type A behavior pattern may be one of the most important factors in
the development of heart disease. This relationship was initially
described in the Haynes et al. (1980) study mentioned above: Suppressed
hostility was found to substantially elevate the risk of heart disease
for both men and women. Also, one investigation followed over 1,000 male
medical students from 32 to 48 years. At the beginning of the study,
these men completed a questionnaire assessing how they react to
pressure; some indicated that they respond with high levels of
**anger**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}, whereas others indicated
that they respond with less anger. Decades later, researchers found that
those who earlier had indicated the highest levels of anger were over 6
times more likely than those who indicated less anger to have had a
heart attack by age 55, and they were 3.5 times more likely to have
experienced heart disease by the same age (Chang, Ford, Meoni, Wang, &
Klag, 2002). From a health standpoint, it clearly does not pay to be an
angry young person.

After reviewing and statistically summarizing 35 studies from 1983 to
2006, Chida and Steptoe (2009) concluded that the bulk of the evidence
suggests that anger and hostility constitute serious long-term risk
factors for adverse cardiovascular outcomes among both healthy
individuals and those already suffering from heart disease. One reason
angry and hostile moods might contribute to cardiovascular diseases is
that such moods can create social strain, mainly in the form of
antagonistic social encounters with others. This strain could then lay
the foundation for disease-promoting cardiovascular responses among
hostile individuals (Vella, Kamarck, Flory, & Manuck, 2012). In this
transactional model, hostility and social strain form a cycle
(`[link] <#CNX_Psych_14_03_Transactional>`__).

|A figure showing the outlines of the female and male body represent the
social interactions outlined in the transactional model of hostility. A
hostile person’s behavior is listed as hostile, confrontational,
defensive, and aggressive. The recipient’s response is surprise,
avoidance, and defensiveness. The transactional cycle is reinforcement
of hostile behavior, and the hostile person’s thoughts and feelings are
anger, mistrust, and devalues others. Arrows connecting the female and
male figures show a continuous pattern.|\ {:
#CNX_Psych_14_03_Transactional}

For example, suppose Kaitlin has a hostile disposition; she has a
cynical, distrustful attitude toward others and often thinks that other
people are out to get her. She is very defensive around people, even
those she has known for years, and she is always looking for signs that
others are either disrespecting or belittling her. In the shower each
morning before work, she often mentally rehearses what she would say to
someone who said or did something that angered her, such as making a
political statement that was counter to her own ideology. As Kaitlin
goes through these mental rehearsals, she often grins and thinks about
the retaliation on anyone who will irk her that day.

Socially, she is confrontational and tends to use a harsh tone with
people, which often leads to very disagreeable and sometimes
argumentative social interactions. As you might imagine, Kaitlin is not
especially popular with others, including coworkers, neighbors, and even
members of her own family. They either avoid her at all costs or snap
back at her, which causes Kaitlin to become even more cynical and
distrustful of others, making her disposition even more hostile.
Kaitlin’s hostility—through her own doing—has created an antagonistic
environment that cyclically causes her to become even more hostile and
angry, thereby potentially setting the stage for cardiovascular
problems.

In addition to anger and hostility, a number of other negative emotional
states have been linked with heart disease, including negative
affectivity and depression (Suls & Bunde, 2005). **Negative
affectivity**\ {: data-type=“term”} is a tendency to experience
distressed emotional states involving anger, contempt, disgust, guilt,
fear, and nervousness (Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988). It has been
linked with the development of both hypertension and heart disease. For
example, over 3,000 initially healthy participants in one study were
tracked longitudinally, up to 22 years. Those with higher levels of
negative affectivity at the time the study began were substantially more
likely to develop and be treated for hypertension during the ensuing
years than were those with lower levels of negative affectivity (Jonas &
Lando, 2000). In addition, a study of over 10,000 middle-aged
London-based civil servants who were followed an average of 12.5 years
revealed that those who earlier had scored in the upper third on a test
of negative affectivity were 32% more likely to have experienced heart
disease, heart attack, or angina over a period of years than were those
who scored in the lowest third (Nabi, Kivimaki, De Vogli, Marmot, &
Singh-Manoux, 2008). Hence, negative affectivity appears to be a
potentially vital risk factor for the development of cardiovascular
disorders.

DEPRESSION AND THE HEART
========================

For centuries, poets and folklore have asserted that there is a
connection between moods and the heart (Glassman & Shapiro, 1998). You
are no doubt familiar with the notion of a broken heart following a
disappointing or depressing event and have encountered that notion in
songs, films, and literature.

Perhaps the first to recognize the link between **depression**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} and **heart disease**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} was Benjamin Malzberg (1937), who found
that the death rate among institutionalized patients with melancholia
(an archaic term for depression) was six times higher than that of the
population. A classic study in the late 1970s looked at over 8,000
manic-depressive persons in Denmark, finding a nearly 50% increase in
deaths from heart disease among these patients compared with the general
Danish population (Weeke, 1979). By the early 1990s, evidence began to
accumulate showing that depressed individuals who were followed for long
periods of time were at increased risk for heart disease and cardiac
death (Glassman, 2007). In one investigation of over 700 Denmark
residents, those with the highest depression scores were 71% more likely
to have experienced a heart attack than were those with lower depression
scores (Barefoot & Schroll, 1996).
`[link] <#CNX_Psych_14_03_HeartAtt>`__ illustrates the gradation in risk
of heart attacks for both men and women.

|A bar graph shows the relationship between depression score quartiles
for men and women on the x-axis and heart attacks per 1000 on the
y-axis. In the 1st depression score quartile, 3 out of 1000 women
experienced heart attacks compared to 8 out of 1000 men. In the 2nd
depression score quartile, 4 out of 1000 women experienced heart attacks
compared to 11 out of 1000 men. In the 3rd depression score quartile, 5
out of 1000 women experienced heart attacks compared to 9 out of 1000
men. In the 4th depression score quartile, 5 out of 1000 women
experienced heart attacks compared to 15 out of 1000 men.|\ {:
#CNX_Psych_14_03_HeartAtt}

After more than two decades of research, it is now clear that a
relationship exists: Patients with heart disease have more depression
than the general population, and people with depression are more likely
to eventually develop heart disease and experience higher mortality than
those who do not have depression (Hare, Toukhsati, Johansson, & Jaarsma,
2013); the more severe the depression, the higher the risk (Glassman,
2007). Consider the following:

-  In one study, death rates from cardiovascular problems was
   substantially higher in depressed people; depressed men were 50% more
   likely to have died from cardiovascular problems, and depressed women
   were 70% more likely (Ösby, Brandt, Correia, Ekbom, & Sparén, 2001).
-  A statistical review of 10 longitudinal studies involving initially
   healthy individuals revealed that those with elevated depressive
   symptoms have, on average, a 64% greater risk of developing heart
   disease than do those with fewer symptoms (Wulsin & Singal, 2003).
-  A study of over 63,000 registered nurses found that those with more
   depressed symptoms when the study began were 49% more likely to
   experience fatal heart disease over a 12-year period (Whang et al.,
   2009).

The American Heart Association, fully aware of the established
importance of depression in cardiovascular diseases, several years ago
recommended routine depression screening for all heart disease patients
(Lichtman et al., 2008). Recently, they have recommended including
depression as a risk factor for heart disease patients (AHA, 2014).

Although the exact mechanisms through which depression might produce
heart problems have not been fully clarified, a recent investigation
examining this connection in early life has shed some light. In an
ongoing study of childhood depression, adolescents who had been
diagnosed with depression as children were more likely to be obese,
smoke, and be physically inactive than were those who had not received
this diagnosis (Rottenberg et al., 2014). One implication of this study
is that depression, especially if it occurs early in life, may increase
the likelihood of living an unhealthy lifestyle, thereby predisposing
people to an unfavorable cardiovascular disease risk profile.

It is important to point out that depression may be just one piece of
the emotional puzzle in elevating the risk for heart disease, and that
chronically experiencing several negative emotional states may be
especially important. A longitudinal investigation of Vietnam War
veterans found that depression, anxiety, hostility, and trait anger each
independently predicted the onset of heart disease (Boyle, Michalek, &
Suarez, 2006). However, when each of these negative psychological
attributes was combined into a single variable, this new variable (which
researchers called psychological risk factor) predicted heart disease
more strongly than any of the individual variables. Thus, rather than
examining the predictive power of isolated psychological risk factors,
it seems crucial for future researchers to examine the effects of
combined and more general negative emotional and psychological traits in
the development of cardiovascular illnesses.

ASTHMA
======

**Asthma**\ {: data-type=“term”} is a chronic and serious disease in
which the airways of the respiratory system become obstructed, leading
to great difficulty expelling air from the lungs. The airway obstruction
is caused by inflammation of the airways (leading to thickening of the
airway walls) and a tightening of the muscles around them, resulting in
a narrowing of the airways (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_14_03_Asthma>`__)
(American Lung Association, 2010). Because airways become obstructed, a
person with asthma will sometimes have great difficulty breathing and
will experience repeated episodes of wheezing, chest tightness,
shortness of breath, and coughing, the latter occurring mostly during
the morning and night (CDC, 2006).

|The effect of asthma on airways is illustrated. A silhouette of a
person is shown with the lungs and airways labeled. There is an arrow
coming from an airway in the lung leading to a magnification of a normal
airway. A cross-section of the normal airway shows the muscle and the
airway wall, with plenty of room for air to get through. An airway
during asthma symptoms is also shown, and the labeled symptoms are
narrowed airway (limited air flow), tightened muscles constrict airway,
inflamed/thickened airway wall, and mucus. A cross-section of the airway
during asthma symptoms shows the thickened airway wall, mucus and
muscle. There is much less room for air to get through.|\ {:
#CNX_Psych_14_03_Asthma}

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
around 4,000 people die each year from asthma-related causes, and asthma
is a contributing factor to another 7,000 deaths each year (CDC, 2013a).
The CDC has revealed that asthma affects 18.7 million U.S. adults and is
more common among people with lower education and income levels (CDC,
2013b). Especially concerning is that asthma is on the rise, with rates
of asthma increasing 157% between 2000 and 2010 (CDC, 2013b).

Asthma attacks are acute episodes in which an asthma sufferer
experiences the full range of symptoms. Asthma exacerbation is often
triggered by environmental factors, such as air pollution, allergens
(e.g., pollen, mold, and pet hairs), cigarette smoke, airway infections,
cold air or a sudden change in temperature, and exercise (CDC, 2013b).

Psychological factors appear to play an important role in asthma
(Wright, Rodriguez, & Cohen, 1998), although some believe that
psychological factors serve as potential triggers in only a subset of
asthma patients (Ritz, Steptoe, Bobb, Harris, & Edwards, 2006). Many
studies over the years have demonstrated that some people with asthma
will experience asthma-like symptoms if they expect to experience such
symptoms, such as when breathing an inert substance that they (falsely)
believe will lead to airway obstruction (Sodergren & Hyland, 1999). As
stress and emotions directly affect immune and respiratory functions,
psychological factors likely serve as one of the most common triggers of
asthma exacerbation (Trueba & Ritz, 2013).

People with asthma tend to report and display a high level of negative
emotions such as anxiety, and asthma attacks have been linked to periods
of high emotionality (Lehrer, Isenberg, & Hochron, 1993). In addition,
high levels of emotional distress during both laboratory tasks and daily
life have been found to negatively affect airway function and can
produce asthma-like symptoms in people with asthma (von Leupoldt, Ehnes,
& Dahme, 2006). In one investigation, 20 adults with asthma wore
preprogrammed wristwatches that signaled them to breathe into a portable
device that measures airway function. Results showed that higher levels
of negative emotions and stress were associated with increased airway
obstruction and self-reported asthma symptoms (Smyth, Soefer, Hurewitz,
Kliment, & Stone, 1999). In addition, D’Amato, Liccardi, Cecchi,
Pellegrino, & D’Amato (2010) described a case study of an 18-year-old
man with asthma whose girlfriend had broken up with him, leaving him in
a depressed state. She had also unfriended him on Facebook , while
friending other young males. Eventually, the young man was able to
“friend” her once again and could monitor her activity through Facebook.
Subsequently, he would experience asthma symptoms whenever he logged on
and accessed her profile. When he later resigned not to use Facebook any
longer, the asthma attacks stopped. This case suggests that the use of
Facebook and other forms of social media may represent a new source of
stress—it may be a triggering factor for asthma attacks, especially in
depressed asthmatic individuals.

Exposure to stressful experiences, particularly those that involve
parental or interpersonal conflicts, has been linked to the development
of asthma throughout the lifespan. A longitudinal study of 145 children
found that parenting difficulties during the first year of life
increased the chances that the child developed asthma by 107% (Klinnert
et al., 2001). In addition, a cross-sectional study of over 10,000
Finnish college students found that high rates of parent or personal
conflicts (e.g., parental divorce, separation from spouse, or severe
conflicts in other long-term relationships) increased the risk of asthma
onset (Kilpeläinen, Koskenvuo, Helenius, & Terho, 2002). Further, a
study of over 4,000 middle-aged men who were interviewed in the early
1990s and again a decade later found that breaking off an important life
partnership (e.g., divorce or breaking off relationship from parents)
increased the risk of developing asthma by 124% over the time of the
study (Loerbroks, Apfelbacher, Thayer, Debling, & Stürmer, 2009).

TENSION HEADACHES
=================

A headache is a continuous pain anywhere in the head and neck region.
Migraine headaches are a type of headache thought to be caused by blood
vessel swelling and increased blood flow (McIntosh, 2013). Migraines are
characterized by severe pain on one or both sides of the head, an upset
stomach, and disturbed vision. They are more frequently experienced by
women than by men (American Academy of Neurology, 2014). Tension
headaches are triggered by tightening/tensing of facial and neck
muscles; they are the most commonly experienced kind of headache,
accounting for about 42% of all headaches worldwide (Stovner et al.,
2007). In the United States, well over one-third of the population
experiences tension headaches each year, and 2–3% of the population
suffers from chronic tension headaches (Schwartz, Stewart, Simon, &
Lipton, 1998).

A number of factors can contribute to tension headaches, including sleep
deprivation, skipping meals, eye strain, overexertion, muscular tension
caused by poor posture, and stress (MedicineNet, 2013). Although there
is uncertainty regarding the exact mechanisms through which stress can
produce tension headaches, stress has been demonstrated to increase
sensitivity to pain (Caceres & Burns, 1997; Logan et al., 2001). In
general, tension headache sufferers, compared to non-sufferers, have a
lower threshold for and greater sensitivity to pain (Ukestad & Wittrock,
1996), and they report greater levels of subjective stress when faced
with a stressor (Myers, Wittrock, & Foreman, 1998). Thus, stress may
contribute to tension headaches by increasing pain sensitivity in
already-sensitive pain pathways in tension headache sufferers (Cathcart,
Petkov, & Pritchard, 2008).

Summary
=======

Psychophysiological disorders are physical diseases that are either
brought about or worsened by stress and other emotional factors. One of
the mechanisms through which stress and emotional factors can influence
the development of these diseases is by adversely affecting the body’s
immune system. A number of studies have demonstrated that stress weakens
the functioning of the immune system. Cardiovascular disorders are
serious medical conditions that have been consistently shown to be
influenced by stress and negative emotions, such as anger, negative
affectivity, and depression. Other psychophysiological disorders that
are known to be influenced by stress and emotional factors include
asthma and tension headaches.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      The white blood cells that attack foreign invaders to the body are
      called \________.

      1. antibodies
      2. telomeres
      3. lymphocytes
      4. immune cells {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      The risk of heart disease is especially high among individuals
      with \________.

      1. depression
      2. asthma
      3. telomeres
      4. lymphocytes {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      The most lethal dimension of Type A behavior pattern seems to be
      \________.

      1. hostility
      2. impatience
      3. time urgency
      4. competitive drive {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which of the following statements pertaining to asthma is *false*?

      1. Parental and interpersonal conflicts have been tied to the
         development of asthma.
      2. Asthma sufferers can experience asthma-like symptoms simply by
         believing that an inert substance they breathe will lead to
         airway obstruction.
      3. Asthma has been shown to be linked to periods of depression.
      4. Rates of asthma have decreased considerably since 2000. {:
         type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Discuss the concept of Type A behavior pattern, its history, and
      what we now know concerning its role in heart disease.

   .. container::

      Type A was conceptualized as a behavioral style characterized by
      competitiveness, time urgency, impatience, and anger/hostility. It
      was later discovered, however, that anger/hostility seems to be
      the dimension that most clearly predicts heart disease.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Consider the study in which volunteers were given nasal drops
      containing the cold virus to examine the relationship between
      stress and immune function (Cohen et al., 1998). How might this
      finding explain how people seem to become sick during stressful
      times in their lives (e.g., final exam week)?

   .. container::

      The results of the study showed that people exposed to the virus
      were more likely to develop a cold if they had high stress scores.
      The implication of this finding is that during stressful times,
      like final exam weeks, the immune system becomes compromised.
      Thus, it’s much easier to get sick during these periods because
      the immune system is not working at full capacity.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      If a family member or friend of yours has asthma, talk to that
      person (if he or she is willing) about their symptom triggers.
      Does this person mention stress or emotional states? If so, are
      there any commonalities in these asthma triggers?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   asthma
      psychophysiological disorder in which the airways of the
      respiratory system become obstructed, leading to great difficulty
      expelling air from the lungs ^
   cardiovascular disorders
      disorders that involve the heart and blood circulation system ^
   heart disease
      several types of adverse heart conditions, including those that
      involve the heart’s arteries or valves or those involving the
      inability of the heart to pump enough blood to meet the body’s
      needs; can include heart attack and stroke ^
   hypertension
      high blood pressure ^
   immune system
      various structures, cells, and mechanisms that protect the body
      from foreign substances that can damage the body’s tissues and
      organs ^
   immunosuppression
      decreased effectiveness of the immune system ^
   lymphocytes
      white blood cells that circulate in the body’s fluids and are
      especially important in the body’s immune response ^
   negative affectivity
      tendency to experience distressed emotional states involving
      anger, contempt, disgust, guilt, fear, and nervousness ^
   psychoneuroimmunology
      field that studies how psychological factors (such as stress)
      influence the immune system and immune functioning ^
   psychophysiological disorders
      physical disorders or diseases in which symptoms are brought about
      or worsened by stress and emotional factors ^
   Type A
      psychological and behavior pattern exhibited by individuals who
      tend to be extremely competitive, impatient, rushed, and hostile
      toward others ^
   Type B
      psychological and behavior pattern exhibited by a person who is
      relaxed and laid back

.. |A bar graph shows the relationship between chronic stressors and the percentage of people who developed colds after receiving the cold virus. About 50% of people with chronic stressors for at least one month developed a cold compared to about 35% without chronic stressors. About 52% of people with chronic stressors for at least three months developed a cold compared to about 35% without chronic stressors. About 51% of people with chronic stressors for at least six months developed a cold compared to about 35% without chronic stressors.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_14_03_StressCold.jpg
.. |A bar graph shows the relationship between telomere length in kilobase pairs and the number of adversities people experienced. Those who experienced zero adversities had about 6.6 kilobase pairs for telomere size. Those who experienced one adversity had about 6.4 kilobase pairs for telomere size. Those who experienced more than one adversity had about 5.9 kilobase pairs for telomere size.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_14_03_Telomeres.jpg
.. |A figure showing outlines of the male and female bodies indicates common heart attack symptoms for each sex. For males, these include lightheadedness, perspiration, chest pain and pressure, stomach pain, and shortness of breath. For females, these include dizziness, anxiety, back and neck pain, shortness of breath, nausea and vomiting.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_14_03_Symptoms.jpg
.. |Photograph A is a distorted image of a person, head in hand, who appears stressed. Photograph B shows a barefoot person lying down on a blanket in the grass.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_14_03_TypeAB.jpg
.. |A figure showing the outlines of the female and male body represent the social interactions outlined in the transactional model of hostility. A hostile person’s behavior is listed as hostile, confrontational, defensive, and aggressive. The recipient’s response is surprise, avoidance, and defensiveness. The transactional cycle is reinforcement of hostile behavior, and the hostile person’s thoughts and feelings are anger, mistrust, and devalues others. Arrows connecting the female and male figures show a continuous pattern.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_14_03_Transactional.jpg
.. |A bar graph shows the relationship between depression score quartiles for men and women on the x-axis and heart attacks per 1000 on the y-axis. In the 1st depression score quartile, 3 out of 1000 women experienced heart attacks compared to 8 out of 1000 men. In the 2nd depression score quartile, 4 out of 1000 women experienced heart attacks compared to 11 out of 1000 men. In the 3rd depression score quartile, 5 out of 1000 women experienced heart attacks compared to 9 out of 1000 men. In the 4th depression score quartile, 5 out of 1000 women experienced heart attacks compared to 15 out of 1000 men.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_14_03_HeartAtt.jpg
.. |The effect of asthma on airways is illustrated. A silhouette of a person is shown with the lungs and airways labeled. There is an arrow coming from an airway in the lung leading to a magnification of a normal airway. A cross-section of the normal airway shows the muscle and the airway wall, with plenty of room for air to get through. An airway during asthma symptoms is also shown, and the labeled symptoms are narrowed airway (limited air flow), tightened muscles constrict airway, inflamed/thickened airway wall, and mucus. A cross-section of the airway during asthma symptoms shows the thickened airway wall, mucus and muscle. There is much less room for air to get through.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_14_03_Asthma.jpg
