=====================
Biological Approaches
=====================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Discuss the
   findings of the Minnesota Study of Twins Reared Apart as they relate
   to personality and genetics \* Discuss temperament and describe the
   three infant temperaments identified by Thomas and Chess \* Discuss
   the evolutionary perspective on personality development

How much of our personality is in-born and biological, and how much is
influenced by the environment and culture we are raised in?
Psychologists who favor the biological approach believe that inherited
predispositions as well as physiological processes can be used to
explain differences in our personalities (Burger, 2008).

In the field of behavioral genetics, the **Minnesota Study of Twins
Reared Apart**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}—a well-known study of
the genetic basis for personality—conducted research with twins from
1979 to 1999. In studying 350 pairs of twins, including pairs of
identical and fraternal twins reared together and apart, researchers
found that identical twins, whether raised together or apart, have very
similar personalities (Bouchard, 1994; Bouchard, Lykken, McGue, Segal, &
Tellegen, 1990; Segal, 2012). These findings suggest the heritability of
some personality traits. **Heritability**\ {: data-type=“term”} refers
to the proportion of difference among people that is attributed to
genetics. Some of the traits that the study reported as having more than
a 0.50 heritability ratio include leadership, obedience to authority, a
sense of well-being, alienation, resistance to stress, and fearfulness.
The implication is that some aspects of our personalities are largely
controlled by genetics; however, it’s important to point out that traits
are not determined by a single gene, but by a combination of many genes,
as well as by epigenetic factors that control whether the genes are
expressed.

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   To what extent is our personality dictated by our genetic makeup?
   View this `video <http://openstax.org/l/persondna>`__ to learn more.

TEMPERAMENT
===========

Most contemporary psychologists believe temperament has a biological
basis due to its appearance very early in our lives (Rothbart, 2011). As
you learned when you studied lifespan development, Thomas and Chess
(1977) found that babies could be categorized into one of three
temperaments: easy, difficult, or slow to warm up. However,
environmental factors (family interactions, for example) and maturation
can affect the ways in which children’s personalities are expressed
(Carter et al., 2008).

Research suggests that there are two dimensions of our temperament that
are important parts of our adult personality—reactivity and
self-regulation (Rothbart, Ahadi, & Evans, 2000). Reactivity refers to
how we respond to new or challenging environmental stimuli;
self-regulation refers to our ability to control that response (Rothbart
& Derryberry, 1981; Rothbart, Sheese, Rueda, & Posner, 2011). For
example, one person may immediately respond to new stimuli with a high
level of anxiety, while another barely notices it.

.. container:: psychology connect-the-concepts

   .. container::

      Body Type and Temperament

   Is there an association between your body type and your temperament?
   The constitutional perspective, which examines the relationship
   between the structure of the human body and behavior, seeks to answer
   this question (Genovese, 2008). The first comprehensive system of
   constitutional psychology was proposed by American psychologist
   William H. Sheldon (1940, 1942). He believed that your body type can
   be linked to your personality. Sheldon’s life’s work was spent
   observing human bodies and temperaments. Based on his observations
   and interviews of hundreds of people, he proposed three
   body/personality types, which he called somatotypes.

   The three somatotypes are ectomorphs, endomorphs, and mesomorphs
   (`[link] <#Figure_11_06_Somatotype>`__). Ectomorphs are thin with a
   small bone structure and very little fat on their bodies. According
   to Sheldon, the ectomorph personality is anxious, self-conscious,
   artistic, thoughtful, quiet, and private. They enjoy intellectual
   stimulation and feel uncomfortable in social situations. Actors
   Adrien Brody and Nicole Kidman would be characterized as ectomorphs.
   Endomorphs are the opposite of ectomorphs. Endomorphs have narrow
   shoulders and wide hips, and carry extra fat on their round bodies.
   Sheldon described endomorphs as being relaxed, comfortable,
   good-humored, even-tempered, sociable, and tolerant. Endomorphs enjoy
   affection and detest disapproval. Queen Latifah and Jack Black would
   be considered endomorphs. The third somatotype is the mesomorph. This
   body type falls between the ectomorph and the endomorph. Mesomorphs
   have large bone structure, well-defined muscles, broad shoulders,
   narrow waists, and attractive, strong bodies. According to Sheldon,
   mesomorphs are adventurous, assertive, competitive, and fearless.
   They are curious and enjoy trying new things, but can also be
   obnoxious and aggressive. Channing Tatum and Scarlett Johannson would
   likely be mesomorphs.

   |The outlines of three human somatotypes are shown. The first is
   labeled, “Endomorph,” the second is labeled “Mesomorph,” and the
   third is labeled “Ectomorph.” Endomorphs are slightly larger than
   mesomorphs, and ectomorphs are slightly smaller than mesomorphs.|\ {:
   #Figure_11_06_Somatotype}

   Sheldon (1949) also conducted further research into somatotypes and
   criminality. He measured the physical proportions of hundreds of
   juvenile delinquent boys in comparison to male college students, and
   found that problem youth were primarily mesomorphs. Why might this
   be? Perhaps it’s because they are quick to anger and don’t have the
   restraint demonstrated by ectomorphs. Maybe it’s because a person
   with a mesomorphic body type reflects high levels of testosterone,
   which may lead to more aggressive behavior. Can you think of other
   explanations for Sheldon’s findings?

   Sheldon’s method of somatotyping is not without criticism, as it has
   been considered largely subjective (Carter & Heath, 1990; Cortés &
   Gatti, 1972; Parnell, 1958). More systematic and controlled research
   methods did not support his findings (Eysenck, 1970). Consequently,
   it’s not uncommon to see his theory labeled as pseudoscience, much
   like Gall’s theory of phrenology (Rafter, 2007; Rosenbaum, 1995).
   However, studies involving correlations between somatotype,
   temperament, and children’s school performance (Sanford et al., 1943;
   Parnell); somatotype and performance of pilots during wartime (Damon,
   1955); and somatotype and temperament (Peterson, Liivamagi, & Koskel,
   2006) did support his theory.

Summary
=======

Some aspects of our personalities are largely controlled by genetics;
however, environmental factors (such as family interactions) and
maturation can affect the ways in which children’s personalities are
expressed.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      The way a person reacts to the world, starting when they are very
      young, including the person’s activity level is known as
      \________.

      1. traits
      2. temperament
      3. heritability
      4. personality {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      Brianna is 18 months old. She cries frequently, is hard to soothe,
      and wakes frequently during the night. According to Thomas and
      Chess, she would be considered \________.

      1. an easy baby
      2. a difficult baby
      3. a slow to warm up baby
      4. a colicky baby {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      According to the findings of the Minnesota Study of Twins Reared
      Apart, identical twins, whether raised together or apart have
      \_______\_ personalities.

      1. slightly different
      2. very different
      3. slightly similar
      4. very similar {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      Temperament refers to \________.

      1. inborn, genetically based personality differences
      2. characteristic ways of behaving
      3. conscientiousness, agreeableness, neuroticism, openness, and
         extroversion
      4. degree of introversion-extroversion {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      How might a temperament mix between parent and child affect family
      life?

   .. container::

      An easygoing parent may be irritated by a difficult child. If both
      parent and child have difficult temperaments, then conflicts in
      the parent-child relationship might result quite often.

Personal Application Questions
==============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Research suggests that many of our personality characteristics
      have a genetic component. What traits do you think you inherited
      from your parents? Provide examples. How might modeling
      (environment) influenced your characteristics as well?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   heritability
      proportion of difference among people that is attributed to
      genetics ^
   temperament
      how a person reacts to the world, including their activity level,
      starting when they are very young

.. |The outlines of three human somatotypes are shown. The first is labeled, “Endomorph,” the second is labeled “Mesomorph,” and the third is labeled “Ectomorph.” Endomorphs are slightly larger than mesomorphs, and ectomorphs are slightly smaller than mesomorphs.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_11_06_Somatotype.jpg
