============
Introduction
============



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

class=“introduction”

class=“summary” title=“Summary”

class=“review-questions” title=“Review Questions”

class=“critical-thinking” title=“Critical Thinking Questions”

class=“personal-application” title=“Personal Application Questions”

class=“references” title=“References”

|Three photos side by side from left to right show someone looking
stressed while taking an exam, a close up of an answer sheet, and a room
full of people taking an exam.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_14_00_College}

Few would deny that today’s college students are under a lot of
pressure. In addition to many usual stresses and strains incidental to
the college experience (e.g., exams, term papers, and the dreaded
freshman 15), students today are faced with increased college tuitions,
burdensome debt, and difficulty finding employment after graduation. A
significant population of non-traditional college students may face
additional stressors, such as raising children or holding down a
full-time job while working toward a degree.

Of course, life is filled with many additional challenges beyond those
incurred in college or the workplace. We might have concerns with
financial security, difficulties with friends or neighbors, family
responsibilities, and we may not have enough time to do the things we
want to do. Even minor hassles—losing things, traffic jams, and loss of
internet service—all involve pressure and demands that can make life
seem like a struggle and that can compromise our sense of well-being.
That is, all can be stressful in some way.

Scientific interest in stress, including how we adapt and cope, has been
longstanding in psychology; indeed, after nearly a century of research
on the topic, much has been learned and many insights have been
developed. This chapter examines stress and highlights our current
understanding of the phenomenon, including its psychological and
physiological natures, its causes and consequences, and the steps we can
take to master stress rather than become its victim.

References
==========

Aboa-Éboulé, C., Brisson, C., Maunsell, E., Mâsse, B., Bourbonnais, R.,
Vézina, M., . . . Dagenais, G. R. (2007). Job strain and risk for acute
recurrent coronary heart disease events. *Journal of the American
Medical Association, 298*, 1652–1660.

Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E. P., & Teasdale, J. D. (1978). Learned
helplessness in humans: Critique and reformulation. *Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 87*, 49–74.

Ader, R. & Cohen, N. (2001). Conditioning and immunity. In R. Ader, D.
L. Felten & N. Cohen (Eds.), *Psychoneuroimmunology* (3rd ed.,
pp. 3–34). New York, NY: Academic Press.

Ader, R., & Cohen, N. (1975). Behaviorally conditioned
immunosuppression. *Psychosomatic Medicine, 37*, 333–340.

Ahola, K., Honkonen, T., Isometsä, E., Kalimo, R., Nykyri, E., Aromaa,
A., & Lönnqvist, J. (2005). The relationship between job-related burnout
and depressive disorders—Results from the Finnish Health 2000 study.
*Journal of Affective Disorders, 88*, 55–62.

Ahola, K., Honkonen, T., Kivamäki, M., Virtanen, M., Isometsä, E.,
Aromaa, A., & Lönnqvist, J. (2006). Contribution of burnout to the
association between job strain and depression: The Health 2000 study.
*Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 48*, 1023–1030.

Alexander, F. (1950). *Psychosomatic medicine*. New York, NY: Norton.

American Academy of Neurology. (2014). *Headache*. Retrieved from
https://patients.aan.com/disorders/index.cfm?event=view&disorder\_id=936

American Heart Association. (2012a). *What is angina?* Retrieved from
http://www.heart.org/idc/groups/heart-public/(wcm?)/(hcm/documents/downloadable/ucm?)\\_300287.pdf

American Heart Association. (2012b). *Why blood pressure matters*.
Retrieved from
http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/Conditions/HighBloodPressure/
WhyBloodPressureMatters/Why-Blood-Pressure-Matters\_UCM\_002051\_Article.jsp

American Heart Association. (2014, February 24). Depression as a risk
factor for poor prognosis among patients with acute coronary syndrome:
Systematic review and recommendations: A scientific statement from the
American Heart Association. *Circulation*. Retrieved from
http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/early/2014/02/24/CIR.0000000000000019.full.pdf+html

American Lung Association. (2010). *Asthma*. Retrieved from
http://www.lung.org/assets/documents/publications/solddc-chapters/asthma.pdf

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.

Bandura, A. (1994). Self-efficacy. In V. S. Ramachandran (Ed.),
*Encyclopedia of human behavior* (Vol. 4, pp. 71–81). New York, NY:
Academic Press.

Bandura, A. (1997). *Self-efficacy: The exercise of control*. New York,
NY: Freeman.

Bandura, A. (2004). Health promotion by social cognitive means. *Health
Education & Behavior, 31*, 143–164.

Barefoot, J. C., & Schroll, M. S. (1996). Symptoms of depression, acute
myocardial infarction, and total mortality in a community sample.
*Circulation, 93*, 1976–1980.

Baron, R. S., & Kerr, N. L. (2003). *Group process, group decision,
group action* (2nd ed.). Berkshire, United Kingdom: Open University
Press.

Baron, R. S., Cutrona, C. E., Hicklin, D., Russell, D. W., & Lubaroff,
D. M. (1990). Social support and immune function among spouses of cancer
patients. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59*, 344–352.

Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for
interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation.
*Psychological Bulletin, 117*, 497–529.

Benson, H., & Proctor, W. (1994). *Beyond the relaxation response: How
to harness the healing power of your personal beliefs*. East Rutherford,
NJ: Berkley Publishing Group.

Berkman, L. F., & Syme, L. (1979). Social networks, host resistance, and
mortality: A nine-year follow-up study of Alameda County residents.
*American Journal of Epidemiology, 109*, 186–204.

Blackburn, E. H., & Epel, E. S. (2012). Telomeres and adversity: Too
toxic to ignore. *Nature, 490*\ (7419), 169–171.

Boehm, J. K., & Kubzansky, L. D. (2012). The heart’s content: The
association between positive psychological well-being and cardiovascular
health. *Psychological Bulletin, 138*, 655–691.

Bolger, N., DeLongis, A., Kessler, R. C., & Schilling, E. A. (1989).
Effects of daily stress on negative mood. *Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 57*, 808–818.

Boyle, S. H., Michalek, J. E., & Suarez, E. C. (2006). Covariation of
psychological attributes and incident coronary heart disease in U.S. Air
Force veterans of the Vietnam War. *Psychosomatic Medicine, 68*,
844–850.

Brickman, P., & Campbell, D. T. (1971). Hedonic relativism and planning
the good society. In M. H. Appley (Ed.), *Adaptation level theory: A*
symposium (pp. 287–302). New York, NY: Academic Press.

Brickman, P., Coats, D., & Janoff-Bulman, R. (1978). Lottery winners and
accident victims: Is happiness relative? *Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 36*, 917–927.

Brondolo, E., Brady, N., Pencille, M., Beatty, D., & Contrada, R. J.
(2009). Coping with racism: A selective review of the literature and a
theoretical and methodological critique. *Journal of Behavioral
Medicine, 32*\ (1), 64–88.

Brummett, B. H., Barefoot, J. C., Siegler, I. C., Clapp-Channing, N. E.,
Lytle, B. L., Bosworth, H. B., . . . Mark, D. B. (2001). Characteristics
of socially isolated patients with coronary artery disease who are at
elevated risk for mortality. *Psychosomatic Medicine, 63*, 267–272.

Caceres, C., & Burns, J. W. (1997). Cardiovascular reactivity to
psychological stress may enhance subsequent pain sensitivity. *Pain,
69*, 237–244.

Campeau, S., Nyhuis, T. J., Sasse, S. K., Kryskow, E. M., Herlihy, L.,
Masini, C. V., . . . Day, H. E. W. (2010). Hypothalamic pituitary
adrenal axis responses to low-intensity stressors are reduced after
voluntary wheel running in rats. *Journal of Neuroendocrinology, 22*,
872–888.

Campisi, J., Bynog, P., McGehee, H., Oakland, J. C., Quirk, S., Taga,
C., & Taylor, M. (2012). Facebook, stress, and incidence of upper
respiratory infection in undergraduate college students.
*Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 15*, 675–681.

Cannon, W. B. (1932). *The wisdom of the body.* New York, NY: W. W.
Norton.

Carroll, J. (2007). *Most Americans “very satisfied” with their personal
lives*. Retrieved from Gallup website:
http://www.gallup.com/poll/103483/Most-Americans-Very-Satisfied-Their-Personal-Lives.aspx

Cathcart, S., Petkov, J., & Pritchard, D. (2008). Effects of induced
stress on experimental pain sensitivity in chronic tension-type headache
sufferers. *European Journal of Neurology, 15*, 552–558.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2006). *You can
control your asthma: A guide to understanding asthma and its triggers*.
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/asthma/pdfs/asthma\_brochure.pdf

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2011). Million
hearts: Strategies to reduce the prevalence of leading cardiovascular
disease risk factors—United States, 2011. *Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report [MMWR], 60*\ (36), 1248–1251. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/wk/mm6036.pdf

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2013a). *Asthma’s
impact on the nation: Data from the CDC National Asthma Control
Program*. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/asthma/impacts\_nation/AsthmaFactSheet.pdf

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2013b). *Breathing
easier*. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/asthma/pdfs/breathing\_easier\_brochure.pdf

Center for Investigating Health Minds. (2013). About. Retrieved from
http://www.investigatinghealthyminds.org/cihmCenter.html

Chandola, T., Britton, A., Brunner, E., Hemingway, H., Malik, M.,
Kumari, M., . . . Marmot, M. (2008). Work stress and coronary heart
disease: What are the mechanisms? *European Heart Journal, 29*, 640–648.

Chang, E. C. (2001). Introduction: Optimism and pessimism and moving
beyond the most fundamental questions. In E. C. Chang (Ed.), *Optimism
and pessimism: Implications for theory, research, and practice*
(pp. 3–12). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Chang, P. P., Ford, D. E., Meoni, L. A., Wang, N. Y., & Klag, M. J.
(2002). Anger in young and subsequent premature cardiovascular disease.
*Archives of Internal Medicine, 162*, 901–906.

Chida, Y., & Steptoe, A. (2009). The association of anger and hostility
with future coronary heart disease: A meta-analytic review or
prospective evidence. *Journal of the American College of Cardiology,
53*, 936–946.

Cohen, S., Frank, E., Doyle, W. J., Skoner, D. P., Rabin, B. S., &
Gwaltney, J. M. J. (1998). Types of stressors that increase
susceptibility to the common cold in healthy adults. *Health Psychology,
17*, 214–223.

Cohen, S., & Herbert, T. B. (1996). Health psychology: Psychological
factors and physical disease from the perspective of human
psychoneuroimmunology. *Annual Review of Psychology, 47*, 113–142.

Cohen, S., & Janicki-Deverts, D. (2012). Who’s stressed? Distributions
of psychological stress in the United States in probability samples in
1993, 2006, and 2009. *Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 42*,
1320–1334.

Cohen, S., Janicki-Deverts, D., & Miller, G. E. (2007). Psychological
distress and disease. *Journal of the American Medical Association, 98*,
1685–1687.

Cohen, S., Doyle, W. J., Turner, R., Alper, C. M., & Skoner, D. P.
(2003). Sociability and susceptibility to the common cold.
*Psychological Science, 14*, 389–395.

Cohrs, J. C., Christie, D. J., White, M. P., & Das, C. (2013).
Contributions of positive psychology to peace: Toward global well-being
and resilience. *American Psychologist, 68*, 590–600.

Compton, W. C. (2005). *An introduction to positive psychology*.
Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth.

Cotton, D. H. G. (1990). *Stress management: An integrated approach to
therapy*. New York, NY: Brunner/Mazel.

Craft, L. L., VanIterson, E. H., Helenowski, I. B., Rademaker, A. W., &
Courneya, K. S. (2012). Exercise effects on depressive symptoms in
cancer survivors: A systematic review and meta-analysis. *Cancer
Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention, 21*, 3–19.

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997). Finding flow. New York, NY: Basic Books.

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1999). If we are so rich, why aren’t we happy?
*American Psychologist, 54*, 821–827.

D’Amato, G., Liccardi, G., Cecchi, L., Pellegrino, F., & D’Amato, M.
(2010). Facebook: A new trigger for asthma? *The Lancet, 376*, 1740.

Davidson, K. W., Mostofsky, E., & Whang, W. (2010). Don’t worry: be
happy: Positive affect and reduced 10-year incident coronary heart
disease: The Canadian Nova Scotia Health Survey. *European Heart
Journal, 31*, 1065–1070.

de Kluizenaar, Y., Gansevoort, R. T., Miedema, H. M. E., & de Jong, P.
E. (2007). Hypertension and road traffic noise exposure. *Journal of
Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 49*, 484–492.

De Vogli, R., Chandola, T., & Marmot, M. G. (2007). Negative aspects of
close relationships and heart disease. *Archives of Internal Medicine,
167*, 1951–1957.

DeLongis, A., Coyne, J. C., Dakof, G., Folkman, S., & Lazarus, R. S.
(1982). Relationship of daily hassles, uplifts, and major life events to
health status. *Health Psychology, 1*, 119–136.

Derogatis, L. R., & Coons, H. L. (1993). Self-report measures of stress.
In L. Goldberger & S. Breznitz (Eds.), *Handbook of stress: Theoretical
and clinical aspec*\ ts (2nd ed., pp. 200–233). New York, NY: Free
Press.

Diehl, M., & Hay, E. L. (2010). Risk and resilience factors in coping
with daily stress in adulthood: The role of age, self-concept
incoherence, and personal control. *Developmental Psychology, 46*,
1132–1146.

Diener, E. (2012). New findings and future directions for subjective
well-being research. *American Psychologist, 67*, 590–597.

Diener, E. (2013). The remarkable changes in the science of subjective
well-being. *Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8*, 663–666.

Diener, E., & Biswas-Diener, R. (2002). Will money increase subjective
well-being? A literature review and guide to needed research. *Social
Indicators Research, 57*, 119–169.

Diener, E., Diener, M., & Diener, C. (1995). Factors predicting the
subjective well-being of nations. *Journal of Personality and Social*
*Psychology, 69*, 851–864.

Diener, E., Lucas, R., & Scollon, C. N. (2006). Beyond the hedonic
treadmill: Revising the adaptation theory of well-being. *American
Psychologist,* *61*, 305–314.

Diener, E., Ng, W., Harter, J., & Arora, R. (2010). Wealth and happiness
across the world: Material prosperity predicts life evaluation, whereas
psychosocial prosperity predicts positive feelings. *Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 99*, 52–61.

Diener, E., Oishi, S., & Ryan, K. L. (2013). Universals and cultural
differences in the causes and structure of happiness: A multilevel
review. In Mental Well-Being (pp. 153–176). Springer Netherlands.

Diener, E., Suh, E. M., Lucas, R. E., & Smith, H. L. (1999). Subjective
well-being: Three decades of progress. *Psychological Bulletin, 125*,
276–302.

Diener, E., Tay, L., & Myers, D. (2011). The religion paradox: If
religion makes people happy, why are so many dropping out? *Journal of
Personality* *and Social Psychology, 101*, 1278–1290.

Diener, E., Tay, L., & Oishi, S. (2013). Rising income and the
subjective well-being of nations. *Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 104*, 267–276.

Diener, E., Wolsic, B., & Fujita, F. (1995). Physical attractiveness and
subjective well-being. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,*
*69*, 120–129.

Dohrenwend, B. P. (2006). Inventorying stressful life events as risk
factors for psychopathology: Toward resolution of the problem of
intracategory variability. *Psychological Bulletin, 132*, 477–495.

Entringer, S., Epel, E. S., Kumsta, R., Lin, J., Hellhammer, D. H.,
Blackburn, E., Wüst, S., & Wadhwa, P. D. (2011). Stress exposure in
intrauterine life is associated with shorter telomere length in young
adulthood. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 108*,
E513–E518.

Epel, E. S., Blackburn, E. H., Lin, J., Dhabhar, F. S., Adler, N. E.,
Morrow, J. D., & Cawthon, R. M. (2004). Accelerated telomere shortening
in response to life stress. *Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 101*, 17312–17315.

Everly, G. S., & Lating, J. M. (2002). *A clinical guide to the
treatment of the human stress response* (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Kluwer
Academic/Plenum Publishing.

Falagas, M. E., Zarkadoulia, E. A., Ioannidou, E. N., Peppas, G.,
Christodoulou, C., & Rafailidis, P. I. (2007). The effect of
psychosocial factors on breast cancer outcome: A systematic review.
*Breast Cancer Research, 9:R44*. Retrieved from
http://breast-cancer-research.com/content/pdf/bcr1744.pdf

Folkman, S., & Lazarus, R. S. (1980). An analysis of coping in a
middle-aged community sample. *Journal of Health and Social Behavior,
21*, 219–239.

Fontana, A. M., Diegnan, T., Villeneuve, A., & Lepore, S. J. (1999).
Nonevaluative social support reduces cardiovascular reactivity in young
women during acutely stressful performance situations. *Journal of
Behavioral Medicine, 22*, 75–91.

Friedman, H. S., & Booth-Kewley, S. (1987). The “disease-prone
personality”: A meta-analytic view of the construct. *American
Psychologist, 42*, 539–555.

Friedman, M. (1977). Type A behavior pattern: Some of its
pathophysiological components. *Bulletin of the New York Academy of
Medicine, 53*, 593–604.

Friedman, M., & Rosenman, R. (1974). *Type A behavior and your heart*.
New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf.

Friedman, M., & Rosenman, R. H. (1959). Association of specific overt
behavior pattern with blood and cardiovascular findings blood
cholesterol level, blood clotting time, incidence of arcus senilis, and
clinical coronary artery disease. *Journal of the American Medical
Association, 169*\ (12), 1286–1296.

Fujita, F., & Diener, E. (2005). Life satisfaction set point: Stability
and change. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88*, 158–164.

Fulmer, C. A., Gelfand, M. J., Kruglanski, A., Kim-Prieto, C., Diener,
E., Pierro, A., & Higgins, E. T. (2010). On “feeling right” in cultural
contexts: How person-culture match affects self-esteem and subjective
well-being. *Psychological Science, 21*, 1563–1569.

Geoffroy, M. C., Hertzman, C., Li, L., & Power, C. (2013). Prospective
association of morning salivary cortisol with depressive symptoms in
mid-life: A life-course study. *PLoS ONE, 8*\ (11), 1–9.

Gerber, M., Kellman, M., Hartman, T., & Pühse, U. (2010). Do exercise
and fitness buffer against stress among Swiss police and emergency
response service officers? *Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 11*,
286–294.

Glaser, R., & Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. (2005). Stress-induced immune
dysfunction: Implications for health. *Nature Reviews Immunology, 5*,
243–251.

Glaser, R., Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Marucha, P. T., MacCallum, R. C.,
Laskowski, B. F., & Malarkey, W. B. (1999). Stress-related changes in
proinflammatory cytokine production in wounds. *Archives of General
Psychiatry, 56*, 450–456.

Glassman, A. H. (2007). Depression and cardiovascular comorbidity.
*Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 9*, 9–17.

Glassman, A. H., & Shapiro, P. A. (1998). Depression and the course of
coronary artery disease. *American Journal of Psychiatry, 155*, 4–11.

Greenberg, J. S. (2006). *Comprehensive stress management* (9th ed.).
Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.

Gregoire, C. (2013, June 5). Happiness index: Only 1 in 3 Americans are
very happy, according to Harris Poll. *The Huffington Post*. Retrieved
from
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/06/01/happiness-index-only-1-in\_n\_3354524.html

Hackney, C. H., & Sanders, G. S. (2003). Religiosity and mental health:
A meta-analysis of recent studies. *Journal for the Scientific Study of
Religion, 42*, 43–55.

Hansen, T. (2012). Parenthood and happiness: A review of folk theories
versus empirical evidence. *Social Indicators Research, 108*, 29–64.

Hare, D. L., Toukhsati, S. R., Johansson, P., & Jaarsma, T. (2013).
Depression and cardiovascular disease: A clinical review. *European
Heart Journal*. Advance online publication. doi:10.1093/eurheartj/eht462

Hatch, S. L., & Dohrenwend, B. P. (2007). Distribution of traumatic and
other stressful life events by race/ethnicity, gender, SES, and age: A
review of the research. *American Journal of Community Psychology, 40*,
313–332.

Haynes, S. G., Feinleib, M., & Kannel, W. B. (1980). The relationship of
psychosocial factors to coronary disease in the Framingham study: III.
Eight-year incidence of coronary heart disease. *American Journal of
Epidemiology, 111*, 37–58.

Head, D., Singh, T., & Bugg, J. M. (2012). The moderating role of
exercise on stress-related effects on the hippocampus and memory in
later adulthood. *Neuropsychology, 26*, 133–143.

Helliwell, J., Layard, R., & Sachs, J. (Eds.). (2013). *World happiness
report 2013*. Retrieved from United Nations Sustainable Development
Solutions Network:
http://unsdsn.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/WorldHappinessReport2013\_online.pdf

Helson, H. (1964). Current trends and issues in adaptation-level theory.
*American Psychologist, 19*, 26–38.

Holmes, T. H., & Masuda, M. (1974). Life change and illness
susceptibility. In B. S. Dohrenwend & B. P. Dohrenwend (Eds.),
*Stressful life events: Their nature and effects* (pp. 45–72). New York,
NY: John Wiley & Sons.

Holmes, T. H., & Rahe, R. H. (1967). The social readjustment rating
scale. *Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 11*, 213–218.

Holmes, T. S., & Holmes, T. H. (1970). Short-term intrusions into the
life style routine. *Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 14*, 121–132.

Holt-Lunstad, J., Smith, T. B., & Layton, J. B. (2010). Social
relationships and mortality risk: A meta-analytic review. *PLoS
Medicine, 7*\ (7), e1000316.

Hupbach, A., & Fieman, R. (2012). Moderate stress enhances immediate and
delayed retrieval of educationally relevant material in healthy young
men. *Behavioral Neuroscience, 126*, 819–825.

Infurna, F. J., & Gerstorf, D. (2014). Perceived control relates to
better functional health and lower cardio-metabolic risk: The mediating
role of physical activity. *Health Psychology, 33*, 85–94.

Infurna, F. J., Gerstorf, D., Ram, N., Schupp, J., & Wagner, G. G.
(2011). Long-term antecedents and outcomes of perceived control.
*Psychology and Aging, 26*, 559–575.

Johnson, W., & Krueger, R. F. (2006). How money buys happiness: Genetic
and environmental processes linking finances and life satisfaction.
*Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90*, 680–691.

Jonas, B. S., & Lando, J. F. (2000). Negative affect as a prospective
risk factor for hypertension. *Psychosomatic Medicine, 62*, 188–196.

Jordan, H. T., Miller-Archie, S. A., Cone, J. E., Morabia, A., &
Stellman, S. D. (2011). Heart disease among those exposed to the
September 11, 2001 World Trade Center disaster: Results from the World
Trade Center Health Registry. *Preventive Medicine: An International
Journal Devoted to Practice and Theory, 53*, 370–376.

Kahneman, D. (2011). *Thinking fast and slow*. New York, NY: Farrar,
Straus, & Giroux.

Kahneman, D., & Deaton, A. (2010). High income improves evaluation of
life, but not emotional well-being. *Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, USA, 107*, 16489–16493.

Kanner, A. D., Coyne, J. C., Schaefer, C., & Lazarus, R. S. (1981).
Comparison of two modes of stress measurement: Daily hassles and uplifts
versus major life events. *Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 4*, 1–39.

Karasek, R., & Theorell, T. (1990). *Healthy work: Stress, productivity,
and the reconstruction of working life*. New York, NY: Basic Books.

Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. (2009). Psychoneuroimmunology: Psychology’s
gateway to the biomedical future. *Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 4*, 367–369.

Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Glaser, R., Gravenstein, S., Malarkey, W. B., &
Sheridan, J., (1996). Chronic stress alters the immune response to
influenza virus vaccine in older adults. *Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA, 93*, 3043–3047.

Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., McGuire, L., Robles, T. F., & Glaser, R. (2002).
Psychoneuroimmunology and psychosomatic medicine: Back to the future.
*Psychosomatic Medicine, 64*, 15–28.

Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., McGuire, L., Robles, T. F., & Glaser, R.
(2002).Psychoneuroimmunology: Psychological influences on immune
function and health. *Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
70*, 537–547.

Kilpeläinen, M., Koskenvuo, M., Helenius, H., & Terho, E. O. (2002).
Stressful life events promote the manifestation of asthma and atopic
diseases. *Clinical and Experimental Allergy, 32*, 256–263.

Kivimäki, M., Head, J., Ferrie, J. E., Shipley, M. J., Brunner, E.,
Vahtera, J., & Marmot, M. G. (2006). Work stress, weight gain and weight
loss. Evidence for bidirectional effects of body mass index in the
Whitehall II study. *International Journal of Obesity, 30*, 982–987.

Klinnert, M. D., Nelson, H. S., Price, M. R., Adinoff, A. D., Leung, M.,
& Mrazek, D. A. (2001). Onset and persistence of childhood asthma:
Predictors from infancy. *Pediatrics, 108*, E69.

Kraus, M. W., Piff, P. K., Mendoza-Denton, R., Rheinschmidt, M. L., &
Keltner, D. (2012). Social class, solipsism, and contextualism: How the
rich are different from the poor. *Psychological Review, 119*, 546–572.

Krosnick, J. A. (1990). Thinking about politics: Comparisons of experts
and novices. New York, NY: Guilford.

Krumboltz, M. (2014, February 18). Just like us? Elephants comfort each
other when they’re stressed out. *Yahoo News*. Retrieved from
http://news.yahoo.com/elephants-know-a-thing-or-two-about-empathy-202224477.html

Lachman, M. E., & Weaver, S. L. (1998). The sense of control as a
moderator of social class differences in health and well-being. *Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 74*, 763–773.

Lavner, J. A., Karney, B. R., & Bradbury, T. N. (2013). Newlyweds’
optimistic forecasts of their marriage: For better or for worse?
*Journal of Family Psychology, 27*, 531–540.

Lazarus, R. P., & Folkman, S. (1984). *Stress, appraisal, and coping*.
New York, NY: Springer.

Lee, M., & Rotheram-Borus, M. J. (2001). Challenges associated with
increased survival among parents living with HIV. *American Journal of
Public Health, 91*, 1303–1309.

Lehrer, P. M., Isenberg, S., & Hochron, S. M. (1993). Asthma and
emotion: A review. *Journal of Asthma, 30*, 5–21.

Lepore, S. J. (1998). Problems and prospects for the social
support-reactivity hypothesis. *Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 20*,
257–269.

Lichtman, J. H., Bigger, T., Blumenthal, J. A., Frasure-Smith, N.,
Kaufmann, P. G., Lespérance, F., . . . Froelicher, E. S. (2008).
Depression and coronary heart disease: Recommendations for screening,
referral, and treatment: A science advisory from the American Heart
Association Prevention Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular
Nursing, Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council on Epidemiology and
Prevention, and Interdisciplinary Council on Quality of Care and
Outcomes Research. *Circulation, 118*, 1768–1775.

Loerbroks, A., Apfelbacher, C. J., Thayer, J. F., Debling, D., &
Stürmer, T. (2009). Neuroticism, extraversion, stressful life events and
asthma: A cohort study of middle-aged adults. *Allergy, 64*, 1444–1450.

Logan H., Lutgendorf, S., Rainville, P., Sheffield, D., Iverson, K., &
Lubaroff, D. (2001). Effects of stress and relaxation on
capsaicin-induced pain. *The Journal of Pain, 2*, 160–170.

Lutter, M. (2007). Book review: Winning a lottery brings no happiness.
*Journal of Happiness Studies, 8*, 155–160.

Lyon, B. L. (2012). Stress, coping, and health. In V. H. Rice (Ed.),
*Handbook of stress, coping, and health: Implications for nursing
research, theory, and practice* (2nd ed., pp. 2–20). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.

Lyubomirsky, S. (2001). Why are some people happier than others? The
role of cognitive and motivational processes in well-being. *American
Psychologist, 56*, 239–249.

Lyubomirsky, S., King, L., & Diener, E. (2005). The benefits of frequent
positive affect: Does happiness lead to success? *Psychological
Bulletin, 131*, 803–855.

Maier, S. F., Watkins, L. R., & Fleshner, M. (1994).
Psychoneuroimmunology: The interface between behavior, brain, and
immunity. *American Journal of Psychology 49*\ (12), 1004–1017.

Malzberg, B. (1937). Mortality among patients with involution
melancholia. *American Journal of Psychiatry, 93*, 1231–1238.

Marmot, M. G., Bosma, H., Hemingway, H., & Stansfeld, S. (1997).
Contribution of job control and other risk factors to social variations
in coronary heart disease incidence. *The Lancet, 350*, 235–239.

Martin, M. W. (2012). *Happiness and the good life*. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.

Maslach, C., & Jackson, S. E. (1981). The measurement of experienced
burnout. *Journal of Occupational Behavior, 2*, 99–113.

McEwan, B. (1998). Protective and damaging effects of stress mediators.
*New England Journal of Medicine, 338*\ (3), 171–179.

McIntosh, J. (2014, July 28) What are headaches? What causes headaches?
*Medical News Today*. Retrieved from
http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/73936.php

MedicineNet. (2013). *Headaches*. Retrieved from
http://www.medicinenet.com/tension\_headache/article.htm#what\_causes\_tension\_headaches

Monat, A., & Lazarus, R. S. (1991). *Stress and coping: An anthology*
(3rd ed.). New York, NY: Columbia University Press.

Myers, D. G. (2000). The funds, friends, and faith of happy people.
*American Psychologist, 55*, 56–67.

Myers, T. C., Wittrock, D. A., & Foreman, G. W., (1998). Appraisal of
subjective stress in individuals with tension-type headache: The
influence of baseline measures. *Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 21*,
469–484.

Mykletun, A., Bjerkeset, O., Dewey, M., Prince, M., Overland, S., &
Stewart, R. (2007). Anxiety, depression, and cause-speciﬁc mortality:
The HUNT study. *Psychosomatic Medicine, 69*, 323–331.

Myrtek, M. (2001). Meta-analyses of prospective studies on coronary
heart disease, type A personality, and hostility. *International Journal
of Cardiology, 79*, 245–251.

Nabi, H., Kivimaki, M., De Vogli, R., Marmot, M. G., & Singh-Manoux, A.
(2008). Positive and negative affect and risk of coronary heart disease:
Whitehall II prospective cohort study. *British Medical Journal, 337*,
a118.

National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases
(NIAMS). (2012). *Understanding autoimmune diseases*. Retrieved from
http://www.niams.nih.gov/Health\_Info/Autoimmune/understanding\_autoimmune.pdf

Nealey-Moore, J. B., Smith, T. W., Uchino, B. N., Hawkins, M. W., &
Olson-Cerny, C. (2007). Cardiovascular reactivity during positive and
negative marital interactions. *Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 30*,
505–519.

Neelakantan, S. (2013). Mind over myocardium. *Nature, 493*, S16–S17.

Neupert, S. D., Almeida, D. M., & Charles, S. T. (2007). Age differences
in reactivity to daily stressors: The role of personal control. *Journal
of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 62B*, P216–P225.

Nusair, M., Al-dadah, A., & Kumar, A. (2012). The tale of mind and
heart: Psychiatric disorders and coronary heart disease. *Missouri
Medicine, 109*, 199–203.

Office on Women’s Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
(2009). *Heart disease: Frequently asked questions*. Retrieved from
http://www.womenshealth.gov/publications/our-publications/fact-sheet/heart-disease.pdf

Ong, A. D., Bergeman, C. S., & Bisconti, T. L. (2005). Unique effects of
daily perceived control on anxiety symptomatology during conjugal
bereavement. *Personality and Individual Differences, 38*, 1057–1067.

Ösby, U., Brandt, L., Correia, N., Ekbom, A., & Sparén, P. (2001).
Excess mortality in bipolar and unipolar depression in Sweden. *Archives
of General Psychiatry, 58*, 844–850.

Park, S. G., Kim, H. C., Min, J. Y., Hwang, S. H., Park, Y. S., & Min,
K. B. (2011). A prospective study of work stressors and the common cold.
*Occupational Medicine, 61*, 53–56. \*\*

Peterson, C., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1984). Causal explanations as a risk
factor for depression: Theory and evidence. *Psychological Review, 91*,
347–374.

Peterson, C., & Steen, T. A. (2002). Optimistic explanatory style. In C.
R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), *Handbook of positive psychology*
(pp. 244–256). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Phillips, A. C. (2011). Blunted as well as exaggerated cardiovascular
reactivity to stress is associated with negative health outcomes.
*Japanese Psychological Research, 53*, 177–192.

Phillips, A. C., Gallagher, S., & Carroll, D. (2009). Social support,
social intimacy, and cardiovascular reactions to acute psychological
stress. *Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 37*, 38–45.

Pinquart, M., & Sörensen, S. (2000). Influence of socioeconomic status,
social network, and competence on subjective well-being in later life. A
meta-analysis. *Psychology and Aging, 15*, 187–224.

Ploubidis, G. B., & Grundy, E. (2009). Personality and all cause
mortality: Evidence for indirect links. *Personality and Individual
differences, 47*, 203–208.

Powell, J. (1996). *AIDS and HIV-related diseases: An educational guide
for professionals and the public*. New York, NY: Insight Books.

Pressman, S. D., & Cohen, S. (2005). Does positive affect influence
health? *Psychological Bulletin, 131*, 925–971.

Puterman, E., Lin, J., Blackburn, E., O’Donovan, A., Adler, N., & Epel,
E. (2010). The power of exercise: Buffering the effect of chronic stress
on telomere length. *PLoS ONE, 5*\ (5), e10837.

Quoidbach, J., Dunn, E. W., Petrides, K. V., & Mikolajczak, M. (2010).
Money giveth, money taketh away: The dual effect of wealth on happiness.
*Psychological Science, 21*, 759–763.

Rahe, R. H. (1974). The pathway between subjects’ recent life changes
and their near-future illness reports: Representative results and
methodological issues. In B. S. Dohrenwend & B. P. Dohrenwend (Eds.),
*Stressful life events: Their nature and effects* (pp. 73–86). New York,
NY: Wiley & Sons.

Rahe, R. H., McKeen, J. D., & Arthur, R. J. (1967). A longitudinal study
of life change and illness patterns. *Journal of Psychosomatic Research,
10*, 355–366.

Raney, J. D., & Troop-Gordon, W. (2012). Computer-mediated communication
with distant friends: Relations with adjustment during students’ first
semester in college. *Journal of Educational Psychology, 104*, 848–861.

Rasmussen, H. N., & Wallio, S. C. (2008). The health benefits of
optimism. In S. J. Lopez (Ed.), *Positive psychology: Exploring the best
in people* (pp. 131–149). Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.

Rasmussen, H. N., Scheier, M. F., & Greenhouse, J. B. (2009). Optimism
and physical health: A meta-analytic review. *Annals of Behavioral
Medicine, 37*, 239–256.

Ritz, T., Steptoe, A., Bobb, C., Harris, A. H. S., & Edwards, M. (2006).
The asthma trigger inventory: Validation of a questionnaire for
perceived triggers of asthma. *Psychosomatic Medicine, 68*, 956–965.

Rosengren, A., Hawken, S., Ounpuu, S., Sliwa, K., Zubaid, M., Almahmeed,
W. A., . . . Yusuf, S. (2004). Association of psychosocial risk factors
with risk of acute myocardial infarction in 11,119 cases and 13,648
controls from 52 countries (the INTERHEART study): Case-control study.
*The Lancet, 364*, 953–962.

Rosenman, R. H., Brand, R. J., Jenkins, C. D., Friedman, M., Straus, R.,
& Wurm, M. (1975). Coronary heart disease in the Western Collaborative
Group Study: Final follow-up experience of 8.5 years. *Journal of the
American Medical Association, 223*, 872–877.

Rottenberg, J., Yaroslavsky, I., Carney, R. M., Freedland, K. E.,
George, C. J., Baki, I., Kovacs, M. (2014). The association between
major depressive disorder and risk factors for cardiovascular disease in
adolescence\ *. Psychosomatic Medicine, 76*, 122–127.

Salmon, P. (2001). Effects of physical exercise on anxiety, depression,
and sensitivity to stress: A unifying theory. *Clinical Psychology
Review, 21*, 33–61.

Saito, K., Kim, J. I., Maekawa, K., Ikeda, Y., & Yokoyama, M. (1997).
The great Hanshin-Awaji earthquake aggravates blood pressure control in
treated hypertensive patients. *American Journal of Hypertension, 10*,
217–221.

Salonen, P., Arola, H., Nygård, C., & Huhtala, H. (2008). Long-term
associations of stress and chronic diseases in ageing and retired
employees. *Psychology, Health, and Medicine, 13*, 55–62.

Sapolsky, R. M. (1998). *Why zebras don’t get ulcers: An updated guide
to stress, stress-related disease, and coping*. New York, NY: Freeman.

Sapolsky, R. M. (2004). Organismal stress and telomeric aging. An
unexpected connection. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA, 101*, 17323–17324.

Schnall, P. L., & Landsbergis, P. A. (1994). Job strain and
cardiovascular disease. *Annual Review of Public Health*, 15, 381–411.

Schwartz, B. S., Stewart, W. F., Simon, D., & Lipton, R. B. (1998).
Epidemiology of tension-type headache. *Journal of the American Medical
Association, 279*, 381–383.

Schwartz, N. M., & Schwartz, M. S. (1995). Definitions of biofeedback
and applied physiology. In M. S. Schwartz & F. Andrasik (Eds.),
*Biofeedback: A practitioners guide* (pp. 32–42). New York, NY:
Guilford.

Scully, J. A., Tosi, H., & Banning, K. (2000). Life event checklists:
Revisiting the Social Readjustment Rating Scale after 30 years.
*Educational and Psychological Measurement, 60*, 864–876.

Segerstrom, S. C., & Miller, G. E. (2004). Psychological stress and the
human immune system: A meta-analytic study of 30 years of inquiry.
*Psychological Bulletin, 130*, 601–630.

Seligman, M. E., & Maier, S. F. (1967). Failure to escape traumatic
shock. *Journal of* *Experimental Psychology, 74*, 1–9.

Seligman, M. E., Maier, S. F., & Geer, J. H. (1968). Alleviation of
learned helplessness in the dog. *Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 3*,
256–262.

Seligman, M. E. P. (2002). *Authentic happiness: Using the new positive
psychology to realize your potential for lasting fulfillment*. New York,
NY: Free Press.

Seligman, M. E. P., Steen, T. A., Park, N., & Peterson, C. (2005).
Positive psychology progress: Empirical validation of interventions.
*American* *Psychologist, 60*, 410–421.

Seligman, M. P., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Positive psychology: An
introduction. *American Psychologist, 55*, 5–14.

Selye, H. (1936). A syndrome produced by diverse nocuous agents.
*Nature, 138*, 32–33.

Selye, H. (1974). *Stress without distress*. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippencott.

Selye, H. (1976). *The stress of life* (Rev. ed.). New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill.

Shalev, I., Moffitt, T. E., Sugden, K., Williams, B., Houts, R. M.,
Danese, A., . . . Caspi, A. (2013). Exposure to violence during
childhood is associated with telomere erosion from 5 to 10 years of age:
A longitudinal study. *Molecular Psychiatry, 18*, 576–581.

Shapiro, P. A. (2005). Heart disease. In J. L. Levenson (Ed.), *Textbook
of psychosomatic medicine* (pp. 423–444). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Publishing.

Sims, M., Diez-Roux, A. V., Dudley, A., Gebreab, S., Wyatt, S. B.,
Bruce, M. A., . . . Taylor, H. A. (2012). Perceived discrimination and
hypertension among African Americans in the Jackson Heart Study
[Supplemental material]. *American Journal of Public Health*, *102*\ (2
Suppl.), S258–S265.

Smyth, J. M., Soefer, M. H., Hurewitz, A., Kliment, A., & Stone, A. A.
(1999). Daily psychosocial factors predict levels and diurnal cycles of
asthma symptomatology and peak flow. *Journal of Behavioral Medicine,
22*, 179–193.

Sodergren, S. C., & Hyland, M. H. (1999). Expectancy and asthma. In I.
Kirsch (Ed.), *How expectancies shape experience* (pp. 197–212).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Speck, R. M., Courneya, K. S., Masse, L. C., Duval, S., & Schmitz, K. H.
(2010). An update of controlled physical activity trials in cancer
survivors: A systematic review and meta-analysis. *Journal of Cancer
Survivorship, 4*, 87–100.

Stansfeld, S. A., Shipley, M. J., Head, J., & Fuhrer, R. (2012).
Repeated job strain and the risk of depression: Longitudinal analyses
from the Whitehall II study. *American Journal of Public Health, 102*,
2360–2366.

Stein, F. (2001). Occupational stress, relaxation therapies, exercise,
and biofeedback. *Work: Journal of Prevention, Assessment, and
Rehabilitation, 17*, 235–246.

Steptoe, A., O’Donnell, K., Marmot, M., & Wardle, J. (2008). Positive
affect and psychosocial processes related to health. *British Journal of
Psychology, 99*, 211–227.

Stovner, L. J., Hagen, K., Jensen, R., Katsarava, Z., Lipson, R., Scher,
A., . . . Zwart, J. (2007). The global burden of headache: A
documentation of headache prevalence and disability worldwide.
*Cephalalgia, 27*, 193–210.

Straub, R. O. (2007). *Health psychology: A biopsychosocial approach*
(2nd ed.). New York, NY: Worth.

Stroebe, W., & Stroebe, M. (1996). The social psychology of social
support. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), *Social psychology:
Handbook of basic principles* (pp. 597–621). New York, NY: Guilford.

Stürmer, T., Hasselbach, P., & Amelang, M. (2006). Personality,
lifestyle, and risk of cardiovascular disease and cancer: Follow-up of
population based cohort. *British Medical Journal, 332*, 1359–1362.

Suls, J., & Bunde, J. (2005). Anger, anxiety, and depression as risk
factors for cardiovascular disease: The problems and implications of
overlapping affective dispositions. *Psychological Bulletin, 131*,
260–300.

Sulsky, L., & Smith, C. (2005). *Work stress*. Belmont, CA: Thomson
Wadsworth.

Surtees, P. G., Wainwright, N. W. J., Luben, R., Wareham, N. J.,
Bingham, S. A., & Khaw, K.-T. (2010). Mastery is associated with
cardiovascular disease mortality in men and women at apparently low
risk. *Health Psychology, 29*, 412–420.

Tatris, T. W., Peeters, M. C. W., Le Blanc, P. M., Schreurs, P. J. G., &
Schaufeli, W. B. (2001). From inequity to burnout: The role of job
stress. *Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 6*, 303–323.

Taylor, S. E. (1999). *Health psychology* (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
McGraw-Hill.

Theorell, T., Tsutsumi, A., Hallquist, J., Reuterwall, C., Hogstedt, C.,
Fredlund, P., . . . Johnson, J. V. (1998). Decision latitude, job
strain, and myocardial infarction: A study of working men in Stockholm.
*American Journal of Public Health, 88*, 382–388.

Thoits, P. A. (2010). Stress and health: Major findings and policy
implications [Supplemental material]. *Journal of Health and Social
Behavior, 51*\ (1 Suppl.), S41–S53.

Trudel, X., Brisson, C., & Milot, A. (2010). Job strain and masked
hypertension. *Psychosomatic Medicine, 72*, 786–793.

Trueba, A. F., & Ritz, T. (2013). Stress, asthma, and respiratory
infections: Pathways involving airway immunology and microbal
endocrinology. *Brain, Behavior and Immunity, 29*, 11–27.

Uchino, B. N. (2009). Understanding the links between social support and
physical health: A life-span perspective with emphasis on the
separability of perceived and received support. *Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 4*, 236–255.

Uchino, B. N., Vaughn, A. A., Carlisle, M., & Birmingham, W. (2012).
Social support and immunity. In S. C. Segerstrom (Ed.), *The Oxford
handbook of psychoneuroimmunology* (pp. 214–233). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.

Ukestad, L. K., and Wittrock, D. A. (1996). Pain perception and coping
in recurrent headache. *Health Psychology, 15*, 65–68.

Vella, E. J., Kamarck, T. W., Flory, J. D., & Manuck, S. (2012). Hostile
mood and social strain during daily life: A test of the transactional
model. *Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 44*, 341–352.

von Leupoldt, A., Ehnes, F., & Dahme, B. (2006). Emotions and
respiratory function in asthma: A comparison of findings in everyday
life and laboratory. *British Journal of Health Psychology, 11*,
185–198.

Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and
validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS
scales. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54*, 1063–1070.

Weeke, A. (1979). Causes of death in manic-depressive. In M. Shou & M.
Stromgren (Eds.), *Origin, prevention, and treatment of affective
disorders* (pp. 289–299). London, England: Academic Press.

Whang, W., Kubzansky, L. D., Kawachi, I., Rexrod, K. M., Kroenke, C. H.,
Glynn, R. J., . . . Albert, C. M. (2009). Depression and risk of sudden
cardiac death and coronary heart disease in women: Results from the
Nurses’ Health Study. *Journal of the American College of Cardiology,
53*, 950–958.

Wilson, T. D., & Gilbert, D. T. (2003). Affective forecasting. *Advances
in Experimental Social Psychology, 35*, 345–411. \*\*

World Health Organization (WHO). (2013). *A global brief on
hypertension: Silent killer, global public health crisis*. Retrieved
from
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/79059/1/WHO\_DCO\_WHD\_2013.2\_eng.pdf?ua=1

Wright, R. J., Rodriguez, M., & Cohen, S. (1998). Review of psychosocial
stress and asthma: An integrated biopsychosocial approach. *Thorax, 53*,
1066–1074.

Wulsin, L. R., & Singal, B. M. (2003). Do depressive symptoms increase
the risk for the onset of coronary disease? A systematic quantitative
review. *Psychosomatic Medicine, 65*, 201–210.

Zacharie, R. (2009). Psychoneuroimmunology: A bio-psycho-social approach
to health and disease. *Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 50*,
645–651.

.. |Three photos side by side from left to right show someone looking stressed while taking an exam, a close up of an answer sheet, and a room full of people taking an exam.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_14_00_College.jpg
