===============================================
The Sociocultural Model and Therapy Utilization
===============================================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Explain how the
   sociocultural model is used in therapy \* Discuss barriers to mental
   health services among ethnic minorities

The sociocultural perspective looks at you, your behaviors, and your
symptoms in the context of your **culture**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis} and background. For example, José is an 18-year-old
Hispanic male from a traditional family. José comes to treatment because
of depression. During the intake session, he reveals that he is gay and
is nervous about telling his family. He also discloses that he is
concerned because his religious background has taught him that
homosexuality is wrong. How does his religious and cultural background
affect him? How might his cultural background affect how his family
reacts if José were to tell them he is gay?

As our society becomes increasingly multiethnic and multiracial, mental
health professionals must develop **cultural competence**\ {:
data-type=“term”} (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_16_05_Ethnic>`__), which means
they must understand and address issues of race, culture, and ethnicity.
They must also develop strategies to effectively address the needs of
various populations for which Eurocentric therapies have limited
application (Sue, 2004). For example, a counselor whose treatment
focuses on individual decision making may be ineffective at helping a
Chinese client with a collectivist approach to problem solving (Sue,
2004).

Multicultural counseling and therapy aims to offer both a helping role
and process that uses modalities and defines goals consistent with the
life experiences and cultural values of clients. It strives to recognize
client identities to include individual, group, and universal
dimensions, advocate the use of universal and culture-specific
strategies and roles in the healing process, and balancs the importance
of individualism and collectivism in the assessment, diagnosis, and
treatment of client and client systems (Sue, 2001).

This therapeutic perspective integrates the impact of cultural and
social norms, starting at the beginning of treatment. Therapists who use
this perspective work with clients to obtain and integrate information
about their cultural patterns into a unique treatment approach based on
their particular situation (Stewart, Simmons, & Habibpour, 2012).
Sociocultural therapy can include individual, group, family, and couples
treatment modalities.

|A photo montage composed of eight photographs arranged in two parallel
rows of four. From the top-left-hand-side, the photos are as follows: a
person with a bicycle standing in a rice paddy, three children, three
elderly people sitting along a rock wall, four cooks standing around a
table, a classroom of students, a group of people seated at a covered
outdoor table, two children wearing robes, and two people being held up
by other people during a wedding ceremony.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_16_05_Ethnic}

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Watch this short `video <http://openstax.org/l/culturalcomp>`__ to
   learn more about cultural competence and sociocultural treatments.

BARRIERS TO TREATMENT
=====================

Statistically, ethnic minorities tend to utilize mental health services
less frequently than White, middle-class Americans (Alegría et al.,
2008; Richman, Kohn-Wood, & Williams, 2007). Why is this so? Perhaps the
reason has to do with access and availability of mental health services.
Ethnic minorities and individuals of low socioeconomic status (SES)
report that barriers to services include lack of insurance,
transportation, and time (Thomas & Snowden, 2002). However, researchers
have found that even when income levels and insurance variables are
taken into account, ethnic minorities are far less likely to seek out
and utilize mental health services. And when access to mental health
services is comparable across ethnic and racial groups, differences in
service utilization remain (Richman et al., 2007).

In a study involving thousands of women, it was found that the
prevalence rate of anorexia was similar across different races, but that
bulimia nervosa was more prevalent among Hispanic and African American
women when compared with non-Hispanic whites (Marques et al., 2011).
Although they have similar or higher rates of eating disorders, Hispanic
and African American women with these disorders tend to seek and engage
in treatment far less than Caucasian women. These findings suggest
ethnic disparities in access to care, as well as clinical and referral
practices that may prevent Hispanic and African American women from
receiving care, which could include lack of bilingual treatment, stigma,
fear of not being understood, family privacy, and lack of education
about eating disorders.

Perceptions and attitudes toward mental health services may also
contribute to this imbalance. A recent study at King’s College, London,
found many complex reasons why people do not seek treatment:
self-sufficiency and not seeing the need for help, not seeing therapy as
effective, concerns about confidentiality, and the many effects of
stigma and shame (Clement et al., 2014). And in another study, African
Americans exhibiting depression were less willing to seek treatment due
to fear of possible psychiatric hospitalization as well as fear of the
treatment itself (Sussman, Robins, & Earls, 1987). Instead of mental
health treatment, many African Americans prefer to be self-reliant or
use spiritual practices (Snowden, 2001; Belgrave & Allison, 2010). For
example, it has been found that the Black church plays a significant
role as an alternative to mental health services by providing prevention
and treatment-type programs designed to enhance the psychological and
physical well-being of its members (Blank, Mahmood, Fox, & Guterbock,
2002).

Additionally, people belonging to ethnic groups that already report
concerns about prejudice and discrimination are less likely to seek
services for a mental illness because they view it as an additional
stigma (Gary, 2005; Townes, Cunningham, & Chavez-Korell, 2009; Scott,
McCoy, Munson, Snowden, & McMillen, 2011). For example, in one recent
study of 462 older Korean Americans (over the age of 60) many
participants reported suffering from depressive symptoms. However, 71%
indicated they thought depression was a sign of personal weakness, and
14% reported that having a mentally ill family member would bring shame
to the family (Jang, Chiriboga, & Okazaki, 2009).

Language differences are a further barrier to treatment. In the previous
study on Korean Americans’ attitudes toward mental health services, it
was found that there were no Korean-speaking mental health professionals
where the study was conducted (Orlando and Tampa, Florida) (Jang et al.,
2009). Because of the growing number of people from ethnically diverse
backgrounds, there is a need for therapists and psychologists to develop
knowledge and skills to become culturally competent (Ahmed, Wilson,
Henriksen, & Jones, 2011). Those providing therapy must approach the
process from the context of the unique culture of each client (Sue &
Sue, 2007).

.. container:: psychology dig-deeper

   .. container::

      Treatment Perceptions

   By the time a child is a senior in high school, 20% of his
   classmates—that is 1 in 5—will have experienced a mental health
   problem (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1999), and
   8%—about 1 in 12—will have attempted suicide (Centers for Disease
   Control and Prevention, 2014). Of those classmates experiencing
   mental disorders, only 20% will receive professional help (U.S.
   Public Health Service, 2000). Why?

   It seems that the public has a negative perception of children and
   teens with mental health disorders. According to researchers from
   Indiana University, the University of Virginia, and Columbia
   University, interviews with over 1,300 U.S. adults show that they
   believe children with depression are prone to violence and that if a
   child receives treatment for a psychological disorder, then that
   child is more likely to be rejected by peers at school.

   Bernice Pescosolido, author of the study, asserts that this is a
   misconception. However, stigmatization of psychological disorders is
   one of the main reasons why young people do not get the help they
   need when they are having difficulties. Pescosolido and her
   colleagues caution that this stigma surrounding mental illness, based
   on misconceptions rather than facts, can be devastating to the
   emotional and social well-being of our nation’s children.

   This warning played out as a national tragedy in the 2012 shootings
   at Sandy Hook Elementary. In her blog, Suzy DeYoung (2013),
   co-founder of Sandy Hook Promise (the organization parents and
   concerned others set up in the wake of the school massacre) speaks to
   treatment perceptions and what happens when children do not receive
   the mental health treatment they desperately need.

   I've become accustomed to the reaction when I tell people where I'm
   from.

   Eleven months later, it's as consistent as it was back in January.

   Just yesterday, inquiring as to the availability of a rental house
   this holiday season, the gentleman taking my information paused to
   ask, “Newtown, CT? Isn't that where that…that *thing* happened?

   A recent encounter in the Massachusetts Berkshires, however, took me
   by surprise.

   It was in a small, charming art gallery. The proprietor, a woman who
   looked to be in her 60s, asked where we were from. My response
   usually depends on my present mood and readiness for the inevitable
   dialogue. Sometimes it's simply, Connecticut. This time, I replied,
   Newtown, CT.

   The woman's demeanor abruptly shifted from one of amiable
   graciousness to one of visible agitation.

   “Oh my god,” she said wide eyed and open mouthed. “Did you know her?”

   . . . .

   “Her?” I inquired

   That woman,” she replied with disdain, “that woman that raised that
   monster.”

   “That woman's” name was Nancy Lanza. Her son, Adam, killed her with a
   rifle blast to the head before heading out to kill 20 children and
   six educators at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, CT last
   December 14th.

   When Nelba Marquez Greene, whose beautiful 6-year-old daughter, Ana,
   was killed by Adam Lanza, was recently asked how she felt about “that
   woman,” this was her reply:

   “She's a victim herself. And it's time in America that we start
   looking at mental illness with compassion, and helping people who
   need it.

   “This was a family that needed help, an individual that needed help
   and didn't get it. And what better can come of this, of this time in
   America, than if we can get help to people who really need it?”
   (pars. 1–7, 10–15)

   Fortunately, we are starting to see campaigns related to the
   destigmatization of mental illness and an increase in public
   education and awareness. Join the effort by encouraging and
   supporting those around you to seek help if they need it. To learn
   more, visit the National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) website
   (http://www.nami.org/). The nation’s largest nonprofit mental health
   advocacy and support organization is NAMI.

Summary
=======

The sociocultural perspective looks at you, your behaviors, and your
symptoms in the context of your culture and background. Clinicians using
this approach integrate cultural and religious beliefs into the
therapeutic process. Research has shown that ethnic minorities are less
likely to access mental health services than their White middle-class
American counterparts. Barriers to treatment include lack of insurance,
transportation, and time; cultural views that mental illness is a
stigma; fears about treatment; and language barriers.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      The sociocultural perspective looks at you, your behaviors, and
      your symptoms in the context of your \________.

      1. education
      2. socioeconomic status
      3. culture and background
      4. age {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which of the following was *not* listed as a barrier to mental
      health treatment?

      1. fears about treatment
      2. language
      3. transportation
      4. being a member of the ethnic majority {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

Critical Thinking Question
==========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Lashawn is a 24-year-old African American female. For years she
      has been struggling with bulimia. She knows she has a problem, but
      she is not willing to seek mental health services. What are some
      reasons why she may be hesitant to get help?

   .. container::

      One reason may be that her culture views having a mental illness
      as a stigma. Additionally, perhaps she doesn’t have insurance and
      is worried about the cost of therapy. She could also be afraid
      that a White counselor would not understand her cultural
      background, so she would feel uncomfortable sharing things. Also,
      she may believe she is self-reliant and tell herself that she’s a
      strong woman who can fix this problem on her own without the help
      of a therapist.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      What is your attitude toward mental health treatment? Would you
      seek treatment if you were experiencing symptoms or having trouble
      functioning in your life? Why or why not? In what ways do you
      think your cultural and/or religious beliefs influence your
      attitude toward psychological intervention?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   cultural competence
      therapist’s understanding and attention to issues of race,
      culture, and ethnicity in providing treatment

.. |A photo montage composed of eight photographs arranged in two parallel rows of four. From the top-left-hand-side, the photos are as follows: a person with a bicycle standing in a rice paddy, three children, three elderly people sitting along a rock wall, four cooks standing around a table, a classroom of students, a group of people seated at a covered outdoor table, two children wearing robes, and two people being held up by other people during a wedding ceremony.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_16_05_Ethnic.jpg
