=========================================================
Industrial Psychology: Selecting and Evaluating Employees
=========================================================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Explain the
   aspects of employee selection \* Describe the kinds of job training
   \* Describe the approaches to and issues surrounding performance
   assessment

The branch of I-O psychology known as industrial psychology focuses on
identifying and matching persons to tasks within an organization. This
involves **job analysis**\ {: data-type=“term”}, which means accurately
describing the task or job. Then, organizations must identify the
characteristics of applicants for a match to the job analysis. It also
involves training employees from their first day on the job throughout
their tenure within the organization, and appraising their performance
along the way.

SELECTING EMPLOYEES
===================

When you read job advertisements, do you ever wonder how the company
comes up with the job description? Often, this is done with the help of
I-O psychologists. There are two related but different approaches to job
analysis—you may be familiar with the results of each as they often
appear on the same job advertisement. The first approach is
task-oriented and lists in detail the tasks that will be performed for
the job. Each task is typically rated on scales for how frequently it is
performed, how difficult it is, and how important it is to the job. The
second approach is worker-oriented. This approach describes the
characteristics required of the worker to successfully perform the job.
This second approach has been called job specification (Dierdorff &
Wilson, 2003). For job specification, the knowledge, skills, and
abilities (KSAs) that the job requires are identified.

Observation, surveys, and interviews are used to obtain the information
required for both types of job analysis. It is possible to observe
someone who is proficient in a position and analyze what skills are
apparent. Another approach used is to interview people presently holding
that position, their peers, and their supervisors to get a consensus of
what they believe are the requirements of the job.

How accurate and reliable is a job analysis? Research suggests that it
can depend on the nature of the descriptions and the source for the job
analysis. For example, Dierdorff & Wilson (2003) found that job analyses
developed from descriptions provided by people holding the job
themselves were the least reliable; however, they did not study or
speculate why this was the case.

The United States Department of Labor maintains a database of previously
compiled job analyses for different jobs and occupations. This allows
the I-O psychologist to access previous analyses for nearly any type of
occupation. This system is called **O*Net**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis} (accessible at www.online.onetcenter.org). The site is
open and you can see the KSAs that are listed for your own position or
one you might be curious about. Each occupation lists the tasks,
knowledge, skills, abilities, work context, work activities, education
requirements, interests, personality requirements, and work styles that
are deemed necessary for success in that position. You can also see data
on average earnings and projected job growth in that industry.

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   The O*Net database describes the skills, knowledge, and education
   required for occupations, as well as what personality types and work
   styles are best suited to the role. See what it has to say about
   being a `food server in a
   restaurant <http://openstax.org/l/sumreport1>`__ or an `elementary
   school teacher <http://openstax.org/l/sumreport2>`__ or an
   `industrial-organizational
   psychologist <http://openstax.org/l/sumreport3>`__.

Candidate Analysis and Testing
------------------------------

Once a company identifies potential candidates for a position, the
candidates’ knowledge, skills, and other abilities must be evaluated and
compared with the job description. These evaluations can involve
testing, an interview, and work samples or exercises. You learned about
personality tests in the chapter on personality; in the I-O context,
they are used to identify the personality characteristics of the
candidate in an effort to match those to personality characteristics
that would ensure good performance on the job. For example, a high
rating of agreeableness might be desirable in a customer support
position. However, it is not always clear how best to correlate
personality characteristics with predictions of job performance. It
might be that too high of a score on agreeableness is actually a
hindrance in the customer support position. For example, if a customer
has a misperception about a product or service, agreeing with their
misperception will not ultimately lead to resolution of their complaint.
Any use of personality tests should be accompanied by a verified
assessment of what scores on the test correlate with good performance
(Arthur, Woehr, & Graziano, 2001). Other types of tests that may be
given to candidates include IQ tests, integrity tests, and physical
tests, such as drug tests or physical fitness tests.

.. container:: psychology what-do-you-think

   .. container::

      Using Cutoff Scores to Determine Job Selection

   Many positions require applicants to take tests as part of the
   selection process. These can include IQ tests, job-specific skills
   tests, or personality tests. The organization may set cutoff scores
   (i.e., a score below which a candidate will not move forward) for
   each test to determine whether the applicant moves on to the next
   stage. For example, there was a case of Robert Jordan, a 49-year-old
   college graduate who applied for a position with the police force in
   New London, Connecticut. As part of the selection process, Jordan
   took the Wonderlic Personnel Test (WPT), a test designed to measure
   cognitive ability.

   Jordan did not make it to the interview stage because his WPT score
   of 33, equivalent to an IQ score of 125 (100 is the average IQ
   score), was too high. The New London Police department policy is to
   not interview anyone who has a WPT score over 27 (equivalent to an IQ
   score over 104) because they believe anyone who scores higher would
   be bored with police work. The average score for police officers
   nationwide is the equivalent of an IQ score of 104 (*Jordan v. New
   London*, 2000; ABC News, 2000).

   Jordan sued the police department alleging that his rejection was
   discrimination and his civil rights were violated because he was
   denied equal protection under the law. The 2nd U.S. Circuit Court of
   Appeals upheld a lower court’s decision that the city of New London
   did not discriminate against him because the same standards were
   applied to everyone who took the exam (The New York Times, 1999).

   What do you think? When might universal cutoff points make sense in a
   hiring decision, and when might they eliminate otherwise potentially
   strong employees?

Interviews
----------

Most jobs for mid-size to large-size businesses in the United States
require a personal interview as a step in the selection process. Because
interviews are commonly used, they have been the subject of considerable
research by industrial psychologists. Information derived from job
analysis usually forms the basis for the types of questions asked.
Interviews can provide a more dynamic source of information about the
candidate than standard testing measures. Importantly, social factors
and body language can influence the outcome of the interview. These
include influences, such as the degree of similarity of the applicant to
the interviewer and nonverbal behaviors, such as hand gestures, head
nodding, and smiling (Bye, Horverak, Sandal, Sam, & Vivjer, 2014; Rakić,
Steffens, & Mummendey, 2011).

There are two types of interviews: unstructured and structured. In an
unstructured interview, the interviewer may ask different questions of
each different candidate. One candidate might be asked about her career
goals, and another might be asked about his previous work experience. In
an unstructured interview, the questions are often, though not always,
unspecified beforehand. And in an unstructured interview the responses
to questions asked are generally not scored using a standard system. In
a structured interview, the interviewer asks the same questions of every
candidate, the questions are prepared in advance, and the interviewer
uses a standardized rating system for each response. With this approach,
the interviewer can accurately compare two candidates’ interviews. In a
meta-analysis of studies examining the effectiveness of various types of
job interviews, McDaniel, Whetzel, Schmidt & Maurer (1994) found that
structured interviews were more effective at predicting subsequent job
performance of the job candidate.

.. container:: psychology everyday-connection

   .. container::

      Preparing for the Job Interview

   You might be wondering if psychology research can tell you how to
   succeed in a **job interview**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}. As
   you can imagine, most research is concerned with the employer’s
   interest in choosing the most appropriate candidate for the job, a
   goal that makes sense for the candidate too. But suppose you are not
   the only qualified candidate for the job; is there a way to increase
   your chances of being hired? A limited amount of research has
   addressed this question.

   As you might expect, nonverbal cues are important in an interview.
   Liden, Martin, & Parsons (1993) found that lack of eye contact and
   smiling on the part of the applicant led to lower applicant ratings.
   Studies of impression management on the part of an applicant have
   shown that self-promotion behaviors generally have a positive impact
   on interviewers (Gilmore & Ferris, 1989). Different personality types
   use different forms of impression management, for example extroverts
   use verbal self-promotion, and applicants high in agreeableness use
   non-verbal methods such as smiling and eye contact. Self-promotion
   was most consistently related with a positive outcome for the
   interview, particularly if it was related to the candidate’s
   person–job fit. However, it is possible to overdo self-promotion with
   experienced interviewers (Howard & Ferris, 1996). Barrick, Swider &
   Stewart (2010) examined the effect of first impressions during the
   rapport building that typically occurs before an interview begins.
   They found that initial judgments by interviewers during this period
   were related to job offers and that the judgments were about the
   candidate’s competence and not just likability. Levine and Feldman
   (2002) looked at the influence of several nonverbal behaviors in mock
   interviews on candidates’ likability and projections of competence.
   Likability was affected positively by greater smiling behavior.
   Interestingly, other behaviors affected likability differently
   depending on the gender of the applicant. Men who displayed higher
   eye contact were less likable; women were more likable when they made
   greater eye contact. However, for this study male applicants were
   interviewed by men and female applicants were interviewed by women.
   In a study carried out in a real setting, DeGroot & Gooty (2009)
   found that nonverbal cues affected interviewers’ assessments about
   candidates. They looked at visual cues, which can often be modified
   by the candidate and vocal (nonverbal) cues, which are more difficult
   to modify. They found that interviewer judgment was positively
   affected by visual and vocal cues of conscientiousness, visual and
   vocal cues of openness to experience, and vocal cues of extroversion.

   What is the take home message from the limited research that has been
   done? Learn to be aware of your behavior during an interview. You can
   do this by practicing and soliciting feedback from mock interviews.
   Pay attention to any nonverbal cues you are projecting and work at
   presenting nonverbal cures that project confidence and positive
   personality traits. And finally, pay attention to the first
   impression you are making as it may also have an impact in the
   interview.

Training
--------

Training is an important element of success and performance in many
jobs. Most jobs begin with an orientation period during which the new
employee is provided information regarding the company history,
policies, and administrative protocols such as time tracking, benefits,
and reporting requirements. An important goal of orientation training is
to educate the new employee about the organizational culture, the
values, visions, hierarchies, norms and ways the company’s employees
interact—essentially how the organization is run, how it operates, and
how it makes decisions. There will also be training that is specific to
the job the individual was hired to do, or training during the
individual’s period of employment that teaches aspects of new duties, or
how to use new physical or software tools. Much of these kinds of
training will be formalized for the employee; for example, orientation
training is often accomplished using software presentations, group
presentations by members of the human resources department or with
people in the new hire’s department
(`[link] <#CNX_Psych_13_02_Training>`__).

|A photograph shows several people sitting at a table and writing on
notepads, as a person in the front of the room writes on a large
tablet.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_13_02_Training}

Mentoring is a form of informal training in which an experienced
employee guides the work of a new employee. In some situations, mentors
will be formally assigned to a new employee, while in others a mentoring
relationship may develop informally.

Mentoring effects on the mentor and the employee being mentored, the
protégé, have been studied in recent years. In a review of mentoring
studies, Eby, Allen, Evans, Ng, & DuBois (2008) found significant but
small effects of mentoring on performance (i.e., behavioral outcomes),
motivation and satisfaction, and actual career outcomes. In a more
detailed review, Allen, Eby, Poteet, Lentz, & Lima (2004) found that
mentoring positively affected a protégé’s compensation and number of
promotions compared with non-mentored employees. In addition, protégés
were more satisfied with their careers and had greater job satisfaction.
All of the effects were small but significant. Eby, Durley, Evans, &
Ragins (2006) examined mentoring effects on the mentor and found that
mentoring was associated with greater job satisfaction and
organizational commitment. Gentry, Weber, & Sadri (2008) found that
mentoring was positively related with performance ratings by
supervisors. Allen, Lentz, & Day (2006) found in a comparison of mentors
and non-mentors that mentoring led to greater reported salaries and
promotions.

Mentoring is recognized to be particularly important to the career
success of women (McKeen & Bujaki, 2007) by creating connections to
informal networks, adopting a style of interaction that male managers
are comfortable with, and with overcoming discrimination in job
promotions.

Gender combinations in mentoring relationships are also an area of
active study. Ragins & Cotton (1999) studied the effects of gender on
the outcomes of mentoring relationships and found that protégés with a
history of male mentors had significantly higher compensation especially
for male protégés. The study found that female mentor–male protégé
relationships were considerably rarer than the other gender
combinations.

In an examination of a large number of studies on the effectiveness of
organizational training to meet its goals, Arthur, Bennett, Edens, and
Bell (2003) found that training was, in fact, effective when measured by
the immediate response of the employee to the training effort,
evaluation of learning outcomes (e.g., a test at the end of the
training), behavioral measurements of job activities by a supervisor,
and results-based criteria (e.g., productivity or profits). The examined
studies represented diverse forms of training including
self-instruction, lecture and discussion, and computer assisted
training.

EVALUATING EMPLOYEES
====================

Industrial and organizational psychologists are typically involved in
designing performance-appraisal systems for organizations. These systems
are designed to evaluate whether each employee is performing her job
satisfactorily. Industrial and organizational psychologists study,
research, and implement ways to make work evaluations as fair and
positive as possible; they also work to decrease the subjectivity
involved with performance ratings. Fairly evaluated work helps employees
do their jobs better, improves the likelihood of people being in the
right jobs for their talents, maintains fairness, and identifies company
and individual training needs.

**Performance appraisals**\ {: data-type=“term”} are typically
documented several times a year, often with a formal process and an
annual face-to-face brief meeting between an employee and his
supervisor. It is important that the original job analysis play a role
in performance appraisal as well as any goals that have been set by the
employee or by the employee and supervisor. The meeting is often used
for the supervisor to communicate specific concerns about the employee’s
performance and to positively reinforce elements of good performance. It
may also be used to discuss specific performance rewards, such as a pay
increase, or consequences of poor performance, such as a probationary
period. Part of the function of performance appraisals for the
organization is to document poor performance to bolster decisions to
terminate an employee.

Performance appraisals are becoming more complex processes within
organizations and are often used to motivate employees to improve
performance and expand their areas of competence, in addition to
assessing their job performance. In this capacity, performance
appraisals can be used to identify opportunities for training or whether
a particular training program has been successful. One approach to
performance appraisal is called 360-degree feedback appraisal
(`[link] <#CNX_Psych_13_02_360Degree>`__). In this system, the
employee’s appraisal derives from a combination of ratings by
supervisors, peers, employees supervised by the employee, and from the
employee herself. Occasionally, outside observers may be used as well,
such as customers. The purpose of 360-degree system is to give the
employee (who may be a manager) and supervisor different perspectives of
the employee’s job performance; the system should help employees make
improvements through their own efforts or through training. The system
is also used in a traditional performance-appraisal context, providing
the supervisor with more information with which to make decisions about
the employee’s position and compensation (Tornow, 1993a).

|A diagram depicts a box titled “Self,” which is surrounded on all four
sides by four more boxes. The box to the left is titled “Peers.” The box
above is titled “Supervisors.” The box to the right is titled
“Customers.” The box below is titled “Reports.” Lines connect each of
these surrounding boxes to the box titled “Self.” In the space between
each of the surrounding boxes, a line with an arrow at each end points
to and from the nearest surrounding box.|\ {:
#CNX_Psych_13_02_360Degree}

Few studies have assessed the effectiveness of 360-degree methods, but
Atkins and Wood (2002) found that the self and peer ratings were
unreliable as an assessment of an employee’s performance and that even
supervisors tended to underrate employees that gave themselves modest
feedback ratings. However, a different perspective sees this variability
in ratings as a positive in that it provides for greater learning on the
part of the employees as they and their supervisor discuss the reasons
for the discrepancies (Tornow, 1993b).

In theory, performance appraisals should be an asset for an organization
wishing to achieve its goals, and most employees will actually solicit
feedback regarding their jobs if it is not offered (DeNisi & Kluger,
2000). However, in practice, many performance evaluations are disliked
by organizations, employees, or both (Fletcher, 2001), and few of them
have been adequately tested to see if they do in fact improve
performance or motivate employees (DeNisi & Kluger, 2000). One of the
reasons evaluations fail to accomplish their purpose in an organization
is that performance appraisal systems are often used incorrectly or are
of an inappropriate type for an organization’s particular culture
(Schraeder, Becton, & Portis, 2007). An organization’s culture is how
the organization is run, how it operates, and how it makes decisions. It
is based on the collective values, hierarchies, and how individuals
within the organization interact. Examining the effectiveness of
performance appraisal systems in particular organizations and the
effectiveness of training for the implementation of the performance
appraisal system is an active area of research in industrial psychology
(Fletcher, 2001).

BIAS AND PROTECTIONS IN HIRING
==============================

In an ideal hiring process, an organization would generate a job
analysis that accurately reflects the requirements of the position, and
it would accurately assess candidates’ KSAs to determine who the best
individual is to carry out the job’s requirements. For many reasons,
hiring decisions in the real world are often made based on factors other
than matching a job analysis to KSAs. As mentioned earlier, interview
rankings can be influenced by other factors: similarity to the
interviewer (Bye, Horverak, Sandal, Sam, & Vijver, 2014) and the
regional accent of the interviewee (Rakić, Steffens, & Mummendey 2011).
A study by Agerström & Rooth (2011) examined hiring managers’ decisions
to invite equally qualified normal-weight and obese job applicants to an
interview. The decisions of the hiring managers were based on
photographs of the two applicants. The study found that hiring managers
that scored high on a test of negative associations with overweight
people displayed a bias in favor of inviting the equally qualified
normal-weight applicant but not inviting the obese applicant. The
association test measures automatic or subconscious associations between
an individual’s negative or positive values and, in this case, the
body-weight attribute. A meta-analysis of experimental studies found
that physical attractiveness benefited individuals in various
job-related outcomes such as hiring, promotion, and performance review
(Hosoda, Stone-Romero, & Coats, 2003). They also found that the strength
of the benefit appeared to be decreasing with time between the late
1970s and the late 1990s.

Some hiring criteria may be related to a particular group an applicant
belongs to and not individual abilities. Unless membership in that group
directly affects potential job performance, a decision based on group
membership is discriminatory (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_13_02_Discrimin>`__).
To combat hiring **discrimination**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis},
in the United States there are numerous city, state, and federal laws
that prevent hiring based on various group-membership criteria. For
example, did you know it is illegal for a potential employer to ask your
age in an interview? Did you know that an employer cannot ask you
whether you are married, a U.S. citizen, have disabilities, or what your
race or religion is? They cannot even ask questions that might shed some
light on these attributes, such as where you were born or who you live
with. These are only a few of the restrictions that are in place to
prevent discrimination in hiring. In the United States, federal
anti-discrimination laws are administered by the U.S. Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC).

|Photograph A shows the side profile of a pregnant woman. Photograph B
shows a cross, a star of David, and a crescent displayed next to one
another. Photograph C shows an older person with a cane walking down the
street.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_13_02_Discrimin}

THE U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION (EEOC)
=======================================================

The **U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)**\ {:
data-type=“term”} is responsible for enforcing federal laws that make it
illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or an employee because
of the person's race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy),
national origin, age (40 or older), disability, or genetic information.
`[link] <#CNX_Psych_13_02_Discrimin2>`__ provides some of the legal
language from laws that have been passed to prevent discrimination.

|A group of three boxes is titled, “Selected Text from Legislation
Prohibiting Employment Discrimination.” The boxes are arranged
vertically. The top box, titled “Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964,” contains the text, “It shall be an unlawful employment practice
for an employer (1) to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any
individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with
respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of
employment, because of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, or
national origin; or (2) to limit, segregate, or classify his employees
or applicants for employment in any way which would deprive or tend to
deprive any individual of employment opportunities or otherwise
adversely affect his status as an employee, because of such individual’s
race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.” The middle box, titled
“The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967,” contains the text,
“It shall be unlawful for an employer (1) to fail or refuse to hire or
to discharge any individual or otherwise discriminate against any
individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or
privileges of employment, because of such individual’s age.” The bottom
box, titled “Titles I and V of the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990 (ADA),” contains the text, “No covered entity shall discriminate
against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to
job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of
employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms,
conditions, and privileges of employment. . . . The term “discriminate
against a qualified individual on the basis of disability” includes . .
. not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental
limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who
is an applicant or employee, unless such covered entity can demonstrate
that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation
of the business of such covered entity.”|\ {:
#CNX_Psych_13_02_Discrimin2}

The United States has several specific laws regarding fairness and
avoidance of discrimination. The Equal Pay Act requires that equal pay
for men and women in the same workplace who are performing equal work.
Despite the law, persistent inequities in earnings between men and women
exist. Corbett & Hill (2012) studied one facet of the gender gap by
looking at earnings in the first year after college in the United
States. Just comparing the earnings of women to men, women earn about 82
cents for every dollar a man earns in their first year out of college.
However, some of this difference can be explained by education, career,
and life choices, such as choosing majors with lower earning potential
or specific jobs within a field that have less responsibility. When
these factors were corrected the study found an unexplained
seven-cents-on-the-dollar gap in the first year after college that can
be attributed to gender discrimination in pay. This approach to analysis
of the gender pay gap, called the human capital model, has been
criticized. Lips (2013) argues that the education, career, and life
choices can, in fact, be constrained by necessities imposed by gender
discrimination. This suggests that removing these factors entirely from
the gender gap equation leads to an estimate of the size of the pay gap
that is too small.

Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 makes it illegal to treat
individuals unfavorably because of their race or color of their skin: An
employer cannot discriminate based on skin color, hair texture, or other
**immutable characteristics**\ {: data-type=“term”}, which are traits of
an individual that are fundamental to her identity, in hiring, benefits,
promotions, or termination of employees. The Pregnancy Discrimination
Act of 1978 amends the Civil Rights Act; it prohibits job (e.g.,
employment, pay, and termination) discrimination of a woman because she
is pregnant as long as she can perform the work required.

The Supreme Court ruling in *Griggs v. Duke Power Co.* made it illegal
under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act to include educational
requirements in a job description (e.g., high school diploma) that
negatively impacts one race over another if the requirement cannot be
shown to be directly related to job performance. The EEOC (2014)
received more than 94,000 charges of various kinds of employment
discrimination in 2013. Many of the filings are for multiple forms of
discrimination and include charges of retaliation for making a claim,
which itself is illegal. Only a small fraction of these claims become
suits filed in a federal court, although the suits may represent the
claims of more than one person. In 2013, there were 148 suits filed in
federal courts.

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   In 2011, the U.S. Supreme Court decided a case in which women
   plaintiffs were attempting to group together in a class-action suit
   against Walmart for gender discrimination in promotion and pay. The
   case was important because it was the only practical way for
   individual women who felt they had been discriminated against to
   sustain a court battle for redress of their claims. The Court
   ultimately decided against the plaintiffs, and the right to a
   class-action suit was denied. However, the case itself effectively
   publicized the issue of gender discrimination in employment. This
   `video <http://openstax.org/l/SCOTUS1>`__ discusses the case history
   and issues. This `PBS NewsHour <http://openstax.org/l/SCOTUS2>`__
   presents the arguments in the court case.

Federal legislation does not protect employees in the private sector
from discrimination related to sexual orientation and gender identity.
These groups include lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
individuals. There is evidence of discrimination derived from surveys of
workers, studies of complaint filings, wage comparison studies, and
controlled job-interview studies (Badgett, Sears, Lau, & Ho, 2009).
Federal legislation protects federal employees from such discrimination;
the District of Columbia and 20 states have laws protecting public and
private employees from discrimination for sexual orientation (American
Civil Liberties Union, n.d). Most of the states with these laws also
protect against discrimination based on gender identity. Gender
identity, as discussed when you learned about sexual behavior, refers to
one’s sense of being male or female.

Many cities and counties have adopted local legislation preventing
discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity (Human
Rights Campaign, 2013a), and some companies have recognized a benefit to
explicitly stating that their hiring must not discriminate on these
bases (Human Rights Campaign, 2013b).

AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA)
=====================================

The **Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)**\ {: data-type=“term”} of
1990 states people may not be discriminated against due to the nature of
their disability. A disability is defined as a physical or mental
impairment that limits one or more major life activities such as
hearing, walking, and breathing. An employer must make reasonable
accommodations for the performance of a disabled employee’s job. This
might include making the work facility handicapped accessible with
ramps, providing readers for blind personnel, or allowing for more
frequent breaks. The ADA has now been expanded to include individuals
with alcoholism, former drug use, obesity, or psychiatric disabilities.
The premise of the law is that disabled individuals can contribute to an
organization and they cannot be discriminated against because of their
disabilities (O'Keefe & Bruyere, 1994).

The Civil Rights Act and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act make
provisions for **bona fide occupational qualifications (BFOQs)**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, which are requirements of certain occupations for
which denying an individual employment would otherwise violate the law.
For example, there may be cases in which religion, national origin, age,
and sex are bona fide occupational qualifications. There are no BFOQ
exceptions that apply to race, although the first amendment protects
artistic expressions, such as films, in making race a requirement of a
role. Clearcut examples of BFOQs would be hiring someone of a specific
religion for a leadership position in a worship facility, or for an
executive position in religiously affiliated institutions, such as the
president of a university with religious ties. Age has been determined
to be a BFOQ for airline pilots; hence, there are mandatory retirement
ages for safety reasons. Sex has been determined as a BFOQ for guards in
male prisons.

Sex (gender) is the most common reason for invoking a BFOQ as a defense
against accusing an employer of discrimination (Manley, 2009). Courts
have established a three-part test for sex-related BFOQs that are often
used in other types of legal cases for determining whether a BFOQ
exists. The first of these is whether all or substantially all women
would be unable to perform a job. This is the reason most physical
limitations, such as “able to lift 30 pounds,” fail as reasons to
discriminate because most women are able to lift this weight. The second
test is the “essence of the business” test, in which having to choose
the other gender would undermine the essence of the business operation.
This test was the reason the now defunct Pan American World Airways
(i.e., Pan Am) was told it could not hire only female flight attendants.
Hiring men would not have undermined the essense of this business. On a
deeper level, this means that hiring cannot be made purely on customers’
or others’ preferences. The third and final test is whether the employer
cannot make reasonable alternative accomodations, such as reassigning
staff so that a woman does not have to work in a male-only part of a
jail or other gender-specific facility. Privacy concerns are a major
reason why discrimination based on gender is upheld by the courts, for
example in situations such as hires for nursing or custodial staff
(Manley, 2009). Most cases of BFOQs are decided on a case-by-case basis
and these court decisions inform policy and future case decisions.

.. container:: psychology what-do-you-think

   .. container::

      Hooters and BFOQ Laws

   |Four Hooters employees are pictured standing side by side. Three of
   them are holding plates of food and the other is holding a pitcher of
   beer. Each of them is wearing a white tank top that says “Hooters,”
   and high cut shorts.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_13_02_Hooters}

   The restaurant chain Hooters, which hires only female wait staff and
   has them dress in a sexually provocative manner, is commonly cited as
   a discriminatory employer. The chain would argue that the female
   employees are an essential part of their business in that they market
   through sex appeal and the wait staff attract customers. Men have
   filed discrimination charges against Hooters in the past for not
   hiring them as wait staff simply because they are men. The chain has
   avoided a court decision on their hiring practices by settling out of
   court with the plaintiffs in each case. Do you think their practices
   violate the Civil Rights Act? See if you can apply the three court
   tests to this case and make a decision about whether a case that went
   to trial would find in favor of the plaintiff or the chain.

Summary
=======

Industrial psychology studies the attributes of jobs, applicants of
those jobs, and methods for assessing fit to a job. These procedures
include job analysis, applicant testing, and interviews. It also studies
and puts into place procedures for the orientation of new employees and
ongoing training of employees. The process of hiring employees can be
vulnerable to bias, which is illegal, and industrial psychologists must
develop methods for adhering to the law in hiring. Performance appraisal
systems are an active area of research and practice in industrial
psychology.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which of the following questions is illegal to ask in a job
      interview in the United States?

      1. Which university did you attend?
      2. Which state were you born in?
      3. Do you have a commercial driver’s license?
      4. What salary would you expect for this position? {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which of the following items is *not* a part of KSAs?

      1. aspiration
      2. knowledge
      3. skill
      4. other abilities {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      Who is responsible for enforcing federal laws that make it illegal
      to discriminate against a job applicant?

      1. Americans with Disabilities Act
      2. Supreme Court of the United States
      3. U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
      4. Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology {:
         type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Construct a good interview question for a position of your
      choosing. The question should relate to a specific skill
      requirement for the position and you will need to include the
      criteria for rating the applicants answer.

   .. container::

      Answers will vary depending on the occupation and question. The
      question should relate to a specific skill for the job and the
      rating should relate to how the answer demonstrates the skill.

.. container::

   .. container::

      What might be useful mechanisms for avoiding bias during
      employment interviews?

   .. container::

      Answers will vary, but they could include clear measurement
      standards for answer and applicant quality, ensuring diversity in
      interviewers or multiple interviews with different diverse
      interviewers, and clear education about the nature of bias for
      interviewers and those who make hiring decisions.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      What are some of the KSAs (knowledge, skills, and abilities) that
      are required for your current position or a position you wish to
      have in the future?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   Americans with Disabilities Act
      employers cannot discriminate against any individual based on a
      disability ^
   bona fide occupational qualification (BFOQ)
      requirement of certain occupations for which denying an individual
      employment would otherwise violate the law, such as requirements
      concerning religion or sex ^
   immutable characteristic
      traits that employers cannot use to discriminate in hiring,
      benefits, promotions, or termination; these traits are fundamental
      to one’s personal identity (e.g. skin color and hair texture) ^
   job analysis
      determining and listing tasks associated with a particular job ^
   performance appraisal
      evaluation of an employee’s success or lack of success at
      performing the duties of the job ^
   U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)
      responsible for enforcing federal laws that make it illegal to
      discriminate against a job applicant or an employee because of the
      person’s race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy),
      national origin, age (40 or older), disability, or genetic
      information

.. |A photograph shows several people sitting at a table and writing on notepads, as a person in the front of the room writes on a large tablet.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_13_02_Training.jpg
.. |A diagram depicts a box titled “Self,” which is surrounded on all four sides by four more boxes. The box to the left is titled “Peers.” The box above is titled “Supervisors.” The box to the right is titled “Customers.” The box below is titled “Reports.” Lines connect each of these surrounding boxes to the box titled “Self.” In the space between each of the surrounding boxes, a line with an arrow at each end points to and from the nearest surrounding box.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_13_02_360Degree.jpg
.. |Photograph A shows the side profile of a pregnant woman. Photograph B shows a cross, a star of David, and a crescent displayed next to one another. Photograph C shows an older person with a cane walking down the street.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_13_02_Discrimin.jpg
.. |A group of three boxes is titled, “Selected Text from Legislation Prohibiting Employment Discrimination.” The boxes are arranged vertically. The top box, titled “Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,” contains the text, “It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer (1) to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, or national origin; or (2) to limit, segregate, or classify his employees or applicants for employment in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any individual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect his status as an employee, because of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.” The middle box, titled “The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967,” contains the text, “It shall be unlawful for an employer (1) to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual or otherwise discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such individual’s age.” The bottom box, titled “Titles I and V of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA),” contains the text, “No covered entity shall discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment. . . . The term “discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of disability” includes . . . not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee, unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of such covered entity.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_13_02_Dicrimin2.jpg
.. |Four Hooters employees are pictured standing side by side. Three of them are holding plates of food and the other is holding a pitcher of beer. Each of them is wearing a white tank top that says “Hooters,” and high cut shorts.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_13_02_Hooters.jpg
