======================
Disorders in Childhood
======================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Describe the
   nature and symptoms of attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and
   autism spectrum disorder \* Discuss the prevalence and factors that
   contribute to the development of these disorders

Most of the disorders we have discussed so far are typically diagnosed
in adulthood, although they can and sometimes do occur during childhood.
However, there are a group of conditions that, when present, are
diagnosed early in childhood, often before the time a child enters
school. These conditions are listed in the DSM-5 as **neurodevelopmental
disorders**\ {: data-type=“term”}, and they involve developmental
problems in personal, social, academic, and intellectual functioning
(APA, 2013). In this section, we will discuss two such disorders:
attention deficit/ hyperactivity disorder and autism.

ATTENTION DEFICIT/HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER
========================================

Diego is always active, from the time he wakes up in the morning until
the time he goes to bed at night. His mother reports that he came out
the womb kicking and screaming, and he has not stopped moving since. He
has a sweet disposition, but always seems to be in trouble with his
teachers, parents, and after-school program counselors. He seems to
accidently break things; he lost his jacket three times last winter, and
he never seems to sit still. His teachers believe he is a smart child,
but he never finishes anything he starts and is so impulsive that he
does not seem to learn much in school.

Diego likely has **attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)**\ {:
data-type=“term”}. The symptoms of this disorder were first described by
Hans Hoffman in the 1920s. While taking care of his son while his wife
was in the hospital giving birth to a second child, Hoffman noticed that
the boy had trouble concentrating on his homework, had a short attention
span, and had to repeatedly go over easy homework to learn the material
(Jellinek & Herzog, 1999). Later, it was discovered that many
hyperactive children—those who are fidgety, restless, socially
disruptive, and have trouble with impulse control—also display short
attention spans, problems with concentration, and distractibility. By
the 1970s, it had become clear that many children who display attention
problems often also exhibit signs of hyperactivity. In recognition of
such findings, the DSM-III (published in 1980) included a new disorder:
attention deficit disorder with and without hyperactivity, now known as
attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).

A child with ADHD shows a constant pattern of inattention and/or
hyperactive and impulsive behavior that interferes with normal
functioning (APA, 2013). Some of the signs of inattention include great
difficulty with and avoidance of tasks that require sustained attention
(such as conversations or reading), failure to follow instructions
(often resulting in failure to complete school work and other duties),
disorganization (difficulty keeping things in order, poor time
management, sloppy and messy work), lack of attention to detail,
becoming easily distracted, and forgetfulness. Hyperactivity is
characterized by excessive movement, and includes fidgeting or
squirming, leaving one’s seat in situations when remaining seated is
expected, having trouble sitting still (e.g., in a restaurant), running
about and climbing on things, blurting out responses before another
person’s question or statement has been completed, difficulty waiting
one’s turn for something, and interrupting and intruding on others.
Frequently, the hyperactive child comes across as noisy and boisterous.
The child’s behavior is hasty, impulsive, and seems to occur without
much forethought; these characteristics may explain why adolescents and
young adults diagnosed with ADHD receive more traffic tickets and have
more automobile accidents than do others (Thompson, Molina, Pelham, &
Gnagy, 2007).

ADHD occurs in about 5% of children (APA, 2013). On the average, boys
are 3 times more likely to have ADHD than are girls; however, such
findings might reflect the greater propensity of boys to engage in
aggressive and antisocial behavior and thus incur a greater likelihood
of being referred to psychological clinics (Barkley, 2006). Children
with ADHD face severe academic and social challenges. Compared to their
non-ADHD counterparts, children with ADHD have lower grades and
standardized test scores and higher rates of expulsion, grade retention,
and dropping out (Loe & Feldman, 2007). they also are less well-liked
and more often rejected by their peers (Hoza et al., 2005).

Previously, ADHD was thought to fade away by adolescence. However,
longitudinal studies have suggested that ADHD is a chronic problem, one
that can persist into adolescence and adulthood (Barkley, Fischer,
Smallish, & Fletcher, 2002). A recent study found that 29.3% of adults
who had been diagnosed with ADHD decades earlier still showed symptoms
(Barbaresi et al., 2013). Somewhat troubling, this study also reported
that nearly 81% of those whose ADHD persisted into adulthood had
experienced at least one other comorbid disorder, compared to 47% of
those whose ADHD did not persist.

Life Problems from ADHD
-----------------------

Children diagnosed with ADHD face considerably worse long-term outcomes
than do those children who do not receive such a diagnosis. In one
investigation, 135 adults who had been identified as having ADHD
symptoms in the 1970s were contacted decades later and interviewed
(Klein et al., 2012). Compared to a control sample of 136 participants
who had never been diagnosed with ADHD, those who were diagnosed as
children:

-  had worse educational attainment (more likely to have dropped out of
   high school and less likely to have earned a bachelor’s degree);
-  had lower socioeconomic status;
-  held less prestigious occupational positions;
-  were more likely to be unemployed;
-  made considerably less in salary;
-  scored worse on a measure of occupational functioning (indicating,
   for example, lower job satisfaction, poorer work relationships, and
   more firings);
-  scored worse on a measure of social functioning (indicating, for
   example, fewer friendships and less involvement in social
   activities);
-  were more likely to be divorced; and
-  were more likely to have non-alcohol-related substance abuse
   problems. (Klein et al., 2012)

Longitudinal studies also show that children diagnosed with ADHD are at
higher risk for substance abuse problems. One study reported that
childhood ADHD predicted later drinking problems, daily smoking, and use
of marijuana and other illicit drugs (Molina & Pelham, 2003). The risk
of substance abuse problems appears to be even greater for those with
ADHD who also exhibit antisocial tendencies (Marshal & Molina, 2006).

Causes of ADHD
--------------

Family and twin studies indicate that genetics play a significant role
in the development of ADHD. Burt (2009), in a review of 26 studies,
reported that the median rate of concordance for identical twins was .66
(one study reported a rate of .90), whereas the median concordance rate
for fraternal twins was .20. This study also found that the median
concordance rate for unrelated (adoptive) siblings was .09; although
this number is small, it is greater than 0, thus suggesting that the
environment may have at least some influence. Another review of studies
concluded that the heritability of inattention and hyperactivity were
71% and 73%, respectively (Nikolas & Burt, 2010).

The specific genes involved in ADHD are thought to include at least two
that are important in the regulation of the neurotransmitter dopamine
(Gizer, Ficks, & Waldman, 2009), suggesting that dopamine may be
important in ADHD. Indeed, medications used in the treatment of ADHD,
such as methylphenidate (Ritalin) and amphetamine with dextroamphetamine
(Adderall), have stimulant qualities and elevate dopamine activity.
People with ADHD show less dopamine activity in key regions of the
brain, especially those associated with motivation and reward (Volkow et
al., 2009), which provides support to the theory that dopamine deficits
may be a vital factor in the development this disorder (Swanson et al.,
2007).

Brain imaging studies have shown that children with ADHD exhibit
abnormalities in their frontal lobes, an area in which dopamine is in
abundance. Compared to children without ADHD, those with ADHD appear to
have smaller frontal lobe volume, and they show less frontal lobe
activation when performing mental tasks. Recall that one of the
functions of the frontal lobes is to inhibit our behavior. Thus,
abnormalities in this region may go a long way toward explaining the
hyperactive, uncontrolled behavior of ADHD.

By the 1970s, many had become aware of the connection between
nutritional factors and childhood behavior. At the time, much of the
public believed that hyperactivity was caused by sugar and food
additives, such as artificial coloring and flavoring. Undoubtedly, part
of the appeal of this hypothesis was that it provided a simple
explanation of (and treatment for) behavioral problems in children. A
statistical review of 16 studies, however, concluded that sugar
consumption has no effect at all on the behavioral and cognitive
performance of children (Wolraich, Wilson, & White, 1995). Additionally,
although food additives have been shown to increase hyperactivity in
non-ADHD children, the effect is rather small (McCann et al., 2007).
Numerous studies, however, have shown a significant relationship between
exposure to nicotine in cigarette smoke during the prenatal period and
ADHD (Linnet et al., 2003). Maternal smoking during pregnancy is
associated with the development of more severe symptoms of the disorder
(Thakur et al., 2013).

Is ADHD caused by poor parenting? Not likely. Remember, the genetics
studies discussed above suggested that the family environment does not
seem to play much of a role in the development of this disorder; if it
did, we would expect the concordance rates to be higher for fraternal
twins and adoptive siblings than has been demonstrated. All things
considered, the evidence seems to point to the conclusion that ADHD is
triggered more by genetic and neurological factors and less by social or
environmental ones.

AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER
========================

A seminal paper published in 1943 by psychiatrist Leo Kanner described
an unusual neurodevelopmental condition he observed in a group of
children. He called this condition early infantile autism, and it was
characterized mainly by an inability to form close emotional ties with
others, speech and language abnormalities, repetitive behaviors, and an
intolerance of minor changes in the environment and in normal routines
(Bregman, 2005). What the DSM-5 refers to as **autism spectrum
disorder**\ {: data-type=“term”} today, is a direct extension of
Kanner’s work.

Autism spectrum disorder is probably the most misunderstood and puzzling
of the neurodevelopmental disorders. Children with this disorder show
signs of significant disturbances in three main areas: (a) deficits in
social interaction, (b) deficits in communication, and (c) repetitive
patterns of behavior or interests. These disturbances appear early in
life and cause serious impairments in functioning (APA, 2013). The child
with autism spectrum disorder might exhibit deficits in social
interaction by not initiating conversations with other children or
turning their head away when spoken to. These children do not make eye
contact with others and seem to prefer playing alone rather than with
others. In a certain sense, it is almost as though these individuals
live in a personal and isolated social world others are simply not privy
to or able to penetrate. Communication deficits can range from a
complete lack of speech, to one word responses (e.g., saying “Yes” or
“No” when replying to questions or statements that require additional
elaboration), to echoed speech (e.g., parroting what another person
says, either immediately or several hours or even days later), to
difficulty maintaining a conversation because of an inability to
reciprocate others’ comments. These deficits can also include problems
in using and understanding nonverbal cues (e.g., facial expressions,
gestures, and postures) that facilitate normal communication.

Repetitive patterns of behavior or interests can be exhibited a number
of ways. The child might engage in stereotyped, repetitive movements
(rocking, head-banging, or repeatedly dropping an object and then
picking it up), or she might show great distress at small changes in
routine or the environment. For example, the child might throw a temper
tantrum if an object is not in its proper place or if a
regularly-scheduled activity is rescheduled. In some cases, the person
with autism spectrum disorder might show highly restricted and fixated
interests that appear to be abnormal in their intensity. For instance,
the person might learn and memorize every detail about something even
though doing so serves no apparent purpose. Importantly, autism spectrum
disorder is not the same thing as intellectual disability, although
these two conditions are often comorbid. The DSM-5 specifies that the
symptoms of autism spectrum disorder are not caused or explained by
intellectual disability.

Life Problems From Autism Spectrum Disorder
-------------------------------------------

Autism spectrum disorder is referred to in everyday language as autism;
in fact, the disorder was termed “autistic disorder” in earlier editions
of the DSM, and its diagnostic criteria were much narrower than those of
autism spectrum disorder. The qualifier “spectrum” in autism spectrum
disorder is used to indicate that individuals with the disorder can show
a range, or spectrum, of symptoms that vary in their magnitude and
severity: some severe, others less severe. The previous edition of the
DSM included a diagnosis of Asperger’s disorder, generally recognized as
a less severe form of autistic disorder; individuals diagnosed with
Asperger’s disorder were described as having average or high
intelligence and a strong vocabulary, but exhibiting impairments in
social interaction and social communication, such as talking only about
their special interests (Wing, Gould, & Gillberg, 2011). However,
because research has failed to demonstrate that **Asperger’s**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} disorder differs qualitatively from
autistic disorder, the DSM-5 does not include it, which is prompting
concerns among some parents that their children may no longer be
eligible for special services (“Asperger’s Syndrome Dropped,” 2012).
Some individuals with autism spectrum disorder, particularly those with
better language and intellectual skills, can live and work independently
as adults. However, most do not because the symptoms remain sufficient
to cause serious impairment in many realms of life (APA, 2013).

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Here is an instructive and poignant
   `video <http://openstax.org/l/sevautism>`__ highlighting severe
   autism.

Currently, estimates indicate that nearly 1 in 88 children in the United
States has autism spectrum disorder; the disorder is 5 times more common
in boys (1 out of 54) than girls (1 out of 252) (CDC, 2012). Rates of
autistic spectrum disorder have increased dramatically since the 1980s.
For example, California saw an increase of 273% in reported cases from
1987 through 1998 (Byrd, 2002); between 2000 and 2008, the rate of
autism diagnoses in the United States increased 78% (CDC, 2012).
Although it is difficult to interpret this increase, it is possible that
the rise in prevalence is the result of the broadening of the diagnosis,
increased efforts to identify cases in the community, and greater
awareness and acceptance of the diagnosis. In addition, mental health
professionals are now more knowledgeable about autism spectrum disorder
and are better equipped to make the diagnosis, even in subtle cases
(Novella, 2008).

.. container:: psychology dig-deeper

   .. container::

      Why Is the Prevalence Rate of ADHD Increasing?

   Many people believe that the rates of ADHD have increased in recent
   years, and there is evidence to support this contention. In a recent
   study, investigators found that the parent-reported prevalence of
   ADHD among children (4–17 years old) in the United States increased
   by 22% during a 4-year period, from 7.8% in 2003 to 9.5% in 2007
   (CDC, 2010). Over time this increase in parent-reported ADHD was
   observed in all sociodemographic groups and was reflected by
   substantial increases in 12 states (Indiana, North Carolina, and
   Colorado were the top three). The increases were greatest for older
   teens (ages 15–17), multiracial and Hispanic children, and children
   with a primary language other than English. Another investigation
   found that from 1998–2000 through 2007–2009 the parent-reported
   prevalence of ADHD increased among U.S. children between the ages of
   5–17 years old, from 6.9% to 9.0% (Akinbami, Liu, Pastor, & Reuben,
   2011).

   A major weakness of both studies was that children were not actually
   given a formal diagnosis. Instead, parents were simply asked whether
   or not a doctor or other health-care provider had ever told them
   their child had ADHD; the reported prevalence rates thus may have
   been affected by the accuracy of parental memory. Nevertheless, the
   findings from these studies raise important questions concerning what
   appears to be a demonstrable rise in the prevalence of ADHD. Although
   the reasons underlying this apparent increase in the rates of ADHD
   over time are poorly understood and, at best, speculative, several
   explanations are viable:

   -  ADHD may be over-diagnosed by doctors who are too quick to
      medicate children as a behavior treatment.
   -  There is greater awareness of ADHD now than in the past. Nearly
      everyone has heard of ADHD, and most parents and teachers are
      aware of its key symptoms. Thus, parents may be quick to take
      their children to a doctor if they believe their child possesses
      these symptoms, or teachers may be more likely now than in the
      past to notice the symptoms and refer the child for evaluation.
   -  The use of computers, video games, iPhones, and other electronic
      devices has become pervasive among children in the early 21st
      century, and these devices could potentially shorten children’s
      attentions spans. Thus, what might seem like inattention to some
      parents and teachers could simply reflect exposure to too much
      technology.
   -  ADHD diagnostic criteria have changed over time.

Causes of Autism Spectrum Disorder
----------------------------------

Early theories of autism placed the blame squarely on the shoulders of
the child’s parents, particularly the mother. Bruno Bettelheim (an
Austrian-born American child psychologist who was heavily influenced by
Sigmund Freud’s ideas) suggested that a mother’s ambivalent attitudes
and her frozen and rigid emotions toward her child were the main causal
factors in childhood autism. In what must certainly stand as one of the
more controversial assertions in psychology over the last 50 years, he
wrote, “I state my belief that the precipitating factor in infantile
autism is the parent’s wish that his child should not exist”
(Bettelheim, 1967, p. 125). As you might imagine, Bettelheim did not
endear himself to a lot of people with this position; incidentally, no
scientific evidence exists supporting his claims.

The exact causes of autism spectrum disorder remain unknown despite
massive research efforts over the last two decades (Meek,
Lemery-Chalfant, Jahromi, & Valiente, 2013). Autism appears to be
strongly influenced by genetics, as identical twins show concordance
rates of 60%–90%, whereas concordance rates for fraternal twins and
siblings are 5%–10% (Autism Genome Project Consortium, 2007). Many
different genes and gene mutations have been implicated in autism (Meek
et al., 2013). Among the genes involved are those important in the
formation of synaptic circuits that facilitate communication between
different areas of the brain (Gauthier et al., 2011). A number of
environmental factors are also thought to be associated with increased
risk for autism spectrum disorder, at least in part, because they
contribute to new mutations. These factors include exposure to
pollutants, such as plant emissions and mercury, urban versus rural
residence, and vitamin D deficiency (Kinney, Barch, Chayka, Napoleon, &
Munir, 2009).

Child Vaccinations and Autism Spectrum Disorder
-----------------------------------------------

In the late 1990s, a prestigious medical journal published an article
purportedly showing that autism is triggered by the MMR (measles, mumps,
and rubella) vaccine. These findings were very controversial and drew a
great deal of attention, sparking an international forum on whether
children should be vaccinated. In a shocking turn of events, some years
later the article was retracted by the journal that had published it
after accusations of fraud on the part of the lead researcher. Despite
the retraction, the reporting in popular media led to concerns about a
possible link between vaccines and autism persisting. A recent survey of
parents, for example, found that roughly a third of respondents
expressed such a concern (Kennedy, LaVail, Nowak, Basket, & Landry,
2011); and perhaps fearing that their children would develop autism,
more than 10% of parents of young children refuse or delay
**vaccinations**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} (Dempsey et al.,
2011). Some parents of children with autism mounted a campaign against
scientists who refuted the vaccine-autism link. Even politicians and
several well-known celebrities weighed in; for example, actress Jenny
McCarthy (who believed that a vaccination caused her son’s autism)
co-authored a book on the matter. However, there is no scientific
evidence that a link exists between autism and vaccinations (Hughes,
2007). Indeed, a recent study compared the vaccination histories of 256
children with autism spectrum disorder with that of 752 control children
across three time periods during their first two years of life (birth to
3 months, birth to 7 months, and birth to 2 years) (DeStefano, Price, &
Weintraub, 2013). At the time of the study, the children were between 6
and 13 years old, and their prior vaccination records were obtained.
Because vaccines contain immunogens (substances that fight infections),
the investigators examined medical records to see how many immunogens
children received to determine if those children who received more
immunogens were at greater risk for developing autism spectrum disorder.
The results of this study, a portion of which are shown in
`[link] <#Figure_15_11_Immunogen>`__, clearly demonstrate that the
quantity of immunogens from vaccines received during the first two years
of life were not at all related to the development of autism spectrum
disorder. There is not a relationship between vaccinations and autism
spectrum disorders.

|A graph has an x-axis labeled “total cumulative immunogens” and a
y-axis with percentage numbers. For children aged 0–3 months, the data
is approximately as follows: 0–25 immunogens are about 48% for ASD cases
and 41% for controls, 26–50 immunogens are 5% for ASD cases and 6% for
controls, and for 3000–3258 immunogens45% for ASD cases and 50% for
controls. For children aged 0–7months, the data is approximately as
follows: 26–50 immunogens are about 20% for ASD cases and 18% for
controls, 51–75 immunogens are 25% for ASD cases and 22% for controls,
3000–3258 immunogens are 45% for ASD cases and 52% for controls,
6000–6258 immunogens are 10% for ASD cases and 8% for controls, and for
9000–9258 immunogens 33% for ASD cases and 40% for controls. For
children aged 0–24 months, the data is approximately as follows: 151–175
immunogens are about 25% for ASD cases and 25% for controls, 176–200
immunogens are 18% for ASD cases and 13% for controls, 9000–9528
immunogens are 17% for ASD cases and 20% for controls, and for
12000–12258 immunogens 25% for ASD cases and25% for controls.|\ {:
#Figure_15_11_Immunogen}

Why does concern over vaccines and autism spectrum disorder persist?
Since the proliferation of the Internet in the 1990s, parents have been
constantly bombarded with online information that can become magnified
and take on a life of its own. The enormous volume of electronic
information pertaining to autism spectrum disorder, combined with how
difficult it can be to grasp complex scientific concepts, can make
separating good research from bad challenging (Downs, 2008). Notably,
the study that fueled the controversy reported that 8 out of 12
children—according to their parents—developed symptoms consistent with
autism spectrum disorder shortly after receiving a vaccination. To
conclude that vaccines cause autism spectrum disorder on this basis, as
many did, is clearly incorrect for a number of reasons, not the least of
which is because correlation does not imply causation, as you’ve
learned.

Additionally, as was the case with diet and ADHD in the 1970s, the
notion that autism spectrum disorder is caused by vaccinations is
appealing to some because it provides a simple explanation for this
condition. Like all disorders, however, there are no simple explanations
for autism spectrum disorder. Although the research discussed above has
shed some light on its causes, science is still a long way from complete
understanding of the disorder.

Summary
=======

Neurodevelopmental disorders are a group of disorders that are typically
diagnosed during childhood and are characterized by developmental
deficits in personal, social, academic, and intellectual realms; these
disorders include attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and
autism spectrum disorder. ADHD is characterized by a pervasive pattern
of inattention and/or hyperactive and impulsive behavior that interferes
with normal functioning. Genetic and neurobiological factors contribute
to the development of ADHD, which can persist well into adulthood and is
often associated with poor long-term outcomes. The major features of
autism spectrum disorder include deficits in social interaction and
communication and repetitive movements or interests. As with ADHD,
genetic factors appear to play a prominent role in the development of
autism spectrum disorder; exposure to environmental pollutants such as
mercury have also been linked to the development of this disorder.
Although it is believed by some that autism is triggered by the MMR
vaccination, evidence does not support this claim.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which of the following is *not* a primary characteristic of ADHD?

      1. short attention span
      2. difficulty concentrating and distractibility
      3. restricted and fixated interest
      4. excessive fidgeting and squirming {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      One of the primary characteristics of autism spectrum disorder is
      \________.

      1. bed-wetting
      2. difficulty relating to others
      3. short attention span
      4. intense and inappropriate interest in others {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Compare the factors that are important in the development of ADHD
      with those that are important in the development of autism
      spectrum disorder.

   .. container::

      Genetic factors appear to play a major role in the development of
      both ADHD and autism spectrum disorder: studies show higher rates
      of concordance among identical twins than among fraternal twins
      for both disorders. In ADHD, genes that regulate dopamine have
      been implicated; in autism spectrum disorder, de novo genetic
      mutations appear to be important. Imaging studies suggest that
      abnormalities in the frontal lobes may be important in the
      development of ADHD. Parenting practices are not connected to the
      development of either disorder. Although environmental toxins are
      generally unimportant in the development of ADHD, exposure to
      cigarette smoke during the prenatal period has been linked to the
      development of the disorder; a number of environmental factors are
      thought to be associated with an increased risk for autism
      spectrum disorder: exposure to pollutants, an urban versus rural
      residence, and vitamin D deficiency. Although some people continue
      to believe that MMR vaccinations can cause autism spectrum
      disorder (due to an influential paper that was later retracted),
      there is no scientific evidence that supports this assertion.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Discuss the characteristics of autism spectrum disorder with a few
      of your friends or members of your family (choose friends or
      family members who know little about the disorder) and ask them if
      they think the cause is due to bad parenting or vaccinations. If
      they indicate that they believe either to be true, why do you
      think this might be the case? What would be your response?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder
      childhood disorder characterized by inattentiveness and/or
      hyperactive, impulsive behavior ^
   autism spectrum disorder
      childhood disorder characterized by deficits in social interaction
      and communication, and repetitive patterns of behavior or
      interests ^
   neurodevelopmental disorder
      one of the disorders that are first diagnosed in childhood and
      involve developmental problems in academic, intellectual, social
      functioning

.. |A graph has an x-axis labeled “total cumulative immunogens” and a y-axis with percentage numbers. For children aged 0–3 months, the data is approximately as follows: 0–25 immunogens are about 48% for ASD cases and 41% for controls, 26–50 immunogens are 5% for ASD cases and 6% for controls, and for 3000–3258 immunogens45% for ASD cases and 50% for controls. For children aged 0–7months, the data is approximately as follows: 26–50 immunogens are about 20% for ASD cases and 18% for controls, 51–75 immunogens are 25% for ASD cases and 22% for controls, 3000–3258 immunogens are 45% for ASD cases and 52% for controls, 6000–6258 immunogens are 10% for ASD cases and 8% for controls, and for 9000–9258 immunogens 33% for ASD cases and 40% for controls. For children aged 0–24 months, the data is approximately as follows: 151–175 immunogens are about 25% for ASD cases and 25% for controls, 176–200 immunogens are 18% for ASD cases and 13% for controls, 9000–9528 immunogens are 17% for ASD cases and 20% for controls, and for 12000–12258 immunogens 25% for ASD cases and25% for controls.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_15_11_Immunogen.jpg
