==========
Aggression
==========



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Define aggression
   \* Define cyberbullying \* Describe the bystander effect

Throughout this chapter we have discussed how people interact and
influence one another’s thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in both
positive and negative ways. People can work together to achieve great
things, such as helping each other in emergencies: recall the heroism
displayed during the 9/11 terrorist attacks. People also can do great
harm to one another, such as conforming to group norms that are immoral
and obeying authority to the point of murder: consider the mass
conformity of Nazis during WWII. In this section we will discuss a
negative side of human behavior—aggression.

AGGRESSION
==========

Humans engage in **aggression**\ {: data-type=“term”} when they seek to
cause harm or pain to another person. Aggression takes two forms
depending on one’s motives: hostile or instrumental. **Hostile
aggression**\ {: data-type=“term”} is motivated by feelings of anger
with intent to cause pain; a fight in a bar with a stranger is an
example of hostile aggression. In contrast, **instrumental
aggression**\ {: data-type=“term”} is motivated by achieving a goal and
does not necessarily involve intent to cause pain (Berkowitz, 1993); a
contract killer who murders for hire displays instrumental aggression.

There are many different theories as to why aggression exists. Some
researchers argue that aggression serves an evolutionary function (Buss,
2004). Men are more likely than women to show aggression (Wilson & Daly,
1985). From the perspective of evolutionary psychology, human male
aggression, like that in nonhuman primates, likely serves to display
dominance over other males, both to protect a mate and to perpetuate the
male’s genes (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_12_06_dominance>`__). Sexual jealousy
is part of male aggression; males endeavor to make sure their mates are
not copulating with other males, thus ensuring their own paternity of
the female’s offspring. Although aggression provides an obvious
evolutionary advantage for men, women also engage in aggression. Women
typically display instrumental forms of aggression, with their
aggression serving as a means to an end (Dodge & Schwartz, 1997). For
example, women may express their aggression covertly, for example, by
communication that impairs the social standing of another person.
Another theory that explains one of the functions of human aggression is
**frustration aggression theory**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}
(Dollard, Doob, Miller, Mowrer, & Sears, 1939). This theory states that
when humans are prevented from achieving an important goal, they become
frustrated and aggressive.

|A photograph shows two monkeys face to face.|\ {:
#CNX_Psych_12_06_dominance}

Bullying
--------

A modern form of aggression is bullying. As you learn in your study of
child development, socializing and playing with other children is
beneficial for children’s psychological development. However, as you may
have experienced as a child, not all play behavior has positive
outcomes. Some children are aggressive and want to play roughly. Other
children are selfish and do not want to share toys. One form of negative
social interactions among children that has become a national concern is
bullying. **Bullying**\ {: data-type=“term”} is repeated negative
treatment of another person, often an adolescent, over time (Olweus,
1993). A one-time incident in which one child hits another child on the
playground would not be considered bullying: Bullying is repeated
behavior. The negative treatment typical in bullying is the attempt to
inflict harm, injury, or humiliation, and bullying can include physical
or verbal attacks. However, bullying doesn’t have to be physical or
verbal, it can be psychological. Research finds gender differences in
how girls and boys bully others (American Psychological Association,
2010; Olweus, 1993). Boys tend to engage in direct, physical aggression
such as physically harming others. Girls tend to engage in indirect,
social forms of aggression such as spreading rumors, ignoring, or
socially isolating others. Based on what you have learned about child
development and social roles, why do you think boys and girls display
different types of bullying behavior?

Bullying involves three parties: the bully, the victim, and witnesses or
bystanders. The act of bullying involves an imbalance of power with the
bully holding more power—physically, emotionally, and/or socially over
the victim. The experience of bullying can be positive for the bully,
who may enjoy a boost to self-esteem. However, there are several
negative consequences of bullying for the victim, and also for the
bystanders. How do you think bullying negatively impacts adolescents?
Being the victim of bullying is associated with decreased mental health,
including experiencing anxiety and depression (APA, 2010). Victims of
bullying may underperform in schoolwork (Bowen, 2011). Bullying also can
result in the victim committing suicide (APA, 2010). How might bullying
negatively affect witnesses?

Although there is not one single personality profile for who becomes a
bully and who becomes a victim of **bullying**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis} (APA, 2010), researchers have identified some patterns in
children who are at a greater risk of being bullied (Olweus, 1993):

-  Children who are emotionally reactive are at a greater risk for being
   bullied. Bullies may be attracted to children who get upset easily
   because the bully can quickly get an emotional reaction from them.
-  Children who are different from others are likely to be targeted for
   bullying. Children who are overweight, cognitively impaired, or
   racially or ethnically different from their peer group may be at
   higher risk.
-  Gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender teens are at very high risk
   of being bullied and hurt due to their sexual orientation.

Cyberbullying
-------------

With the rapid growth of technology, and widely available mobile
technology and social networking media, a new form of bullying has
emerged: cyberbullying (Hoff & Mitchell, 2009). **Cyberbullying**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, like bullying, is repeated behavior that is intended
to cause psychological or emotional harm to another person. What is
unique about cyberbullying is that it is typically covert, concealed,
done in private, and the bully can remain anonymous. This anonymity
gives the bully power, and the victim may feel helpless, unable to
escape the harassment, and unable to retaliate (Spears, Slee, Owens, &
Johnson, 2009).

Cyberbullying can take many forms, including harassing a victim by
spreading rumors, creating a website defaming the victim, and ignoring,
insulting, laughing at, or teasing the victim (Spears et al., 2009). In
cyberbullying, it is more common for girls to be the bullies and victims
because cyberbullying is nonphysical and is a less direct form of
bullying (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_12_06_cyberbully>`__) (Hoff & Mitchell,
2009). Interestingly, girls who become cyberbullies often have been the
victims of cyberbullying at one time (Vandebosch & Van Cleemput, 2009).
The effects of cyberbullying are just as harmful as traditional bullying
and include the victim feeling frustration, anger, sadness,
helplessness, powerlessness, and fear. Victims will also experience
lower self-esteem (Hoff & Mitchell, 2009; Spears et al., 2009).
Furthermore, recent research suggests that both cyberbullying victims
and perpetrators are more likely to experience suicidal ideation, and
they are more likely to attempt suicide than individuals who have no
experience with cyberbullying (Hinduja & Patchin, 2010). What features
of technology make cyberbullying easier and perhaps more accessible to
young adults? What can parents, teachers, and social networking
websites, like Facebook, do to prevent cyberbullying?

|A photograph shows a young person looking at a handheld electronic
device.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_12_06_cyberbully}

THE BYSTANDER EFFECT
====================

The discussion of bullying highlights the problem of witnesses not
intervening to help a victim. This is a common occurrence, as the
following well-publicized event demonstrates. In 1964, in Queens, New
York, a 19-year-old woman named Kitty **Genovese**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis} was attacked by a person with a knife near the back
entrance to her apartment building and again in the hallway inside her
apartment building. When the attack occurred, she screamed for help
numerous times and eventually died from her stab wounds. This story
became famous because reportedly numerous residents in the apartment
building heard her cries for help and did nothing—neither helping her
nor summoning the police—though these have facts been disputed.

Based on this case, researchers Latané and Darley (1968) described a
phenomenon called the bystander effect. The **bystander effect**\ {:
data-type=“term”} is a phenomenon in which a witness or bystander does
not volunteer to help a victim or person in distress. Instead, they just
watch what is happening. Social psychologists hold that we make these
decisions based on the social situation, not our own personality
variables. Why do you think the bystanders didn’t help Genovese? What
are the benefits to helping her? What are the risks? It is very likely
you listed more costs than benefits to helping. In this situation,
bystanders likely feared for their own lives—if they went to her aid the
attacker might harm them. However, how difficult would it have been to
make a phone call to the police from the safety of their apartments? Why
do you think no one helped in any way? Social psychologists claim that
diffusion of responsibility is the likely explanation. **Diffusion of
responsibility**\ {: data-type=“term”} is the tendency for no one in a
group to help because the responsibility to help is spread throughout
the group (Bandura, 1999). Because there were many witnesses to the
attack on Genovese, as evidenced by the number of lit apartment windows
in the building, individuals assumed someone else must have already
called the police. The responsibility to call the police was diffused
across the number of witnesses to the crime. Have you ever passed an
accident on the freeway and assumed that a victim or certainly another
motorist has already reported the accident? In general, the greater the
number of bystanders, the less likely any one person will help.

Summary
=======

Aggression is seeking to cause another person harm or pain. Hostile
aggression is motivated by feelings of anger with intent to cause pain,
and instrumental aggression is motivated by achieving a goal and does
not necessarily involve intent to cause pain Bullying is an
international public health concern that largely affects the adolescent
population. Bullying is repeated behaviors that are intended to inflict
harm on the victim and can take the form of physical, psychological,
emotional, or social abuse. Bullying has negative mental health
consequences for youth including suicide. Cyberbullying is a newer form
of bullying that takes place in an online environment where bullies can
remain anonymous and victims are helpless to address the harassment.
Despite the social norm of helping others in need, when there are many
bystanders witnessing an emergency, diffusion of responsibility will
lead to a lower likelihood of any one person helping.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Typically, bullying from boys is to \_______\_ as bullying from
      girls is to \________.

      1. emotional harm; physical harm
      2. physical harm; emotional harm
      3. psychological harm; physical harm
      4. social exclusion; verbal taunting {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which of the following adolescents is least likely to be targeted
      for bullying?

      1. a child with a physical disability
      2. a transgender adolescent
      3. an emotionally sensitive boy
      4. the captain of the football team {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      The bystander effect likely occurs due to \________.

      1. desensitization to violence
      2. people not noticing the emergency
      3. diffusion of responsibility
      4. emotional insensitivity {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Compare and contrast hostile and instrumental aggression.

   .. container::

      Hostile aggression is intentional with the purpose to inflict
      pain. Hostile aggression is often motivated by anger. In contrast,
      instrumental aggression is not motivated by anger or the intention
      to cause pain. Instrumental aggression serves as a means to reach
      a goal. In a sense it is a more practical or functional form of
      aggression, whereas hostile aggression is more emotion-driven and
      less functional and rational.

.. container::

   .. container::

      What evidence discussed in the previous section suggests that
      cyberbullying is difficult to detect and prevent?

   .. container::

      Cyberbullying is difficult to prevent because there are so many
      forms of media that adolescents use and are exposed to. The
      Internet is virtually everywhere: computers, phones, tablets, TVs,
      gaming systems, and so on. Parents likely do not monitor all of
      their children’s use of the Internet, thus their children could be
      exposed to cyberbullying without their knowledge. Cyberbullying is
      difficult to detect because it can be done anonymously.
      Cyberbullies can use pseudonyms and can attack victims in
      untraceable ways, such as hacking into Facebook accounts or making
      Twitter posts on their behalf.

Personal Application Questions
==============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Have you ever experienced or witnessed bullying or cyberbullying?
      How did it make you feel? What did you do about it? After reading
      this section would you have done anything differently?

.. container::

   .. container::

      The next time you see someone needing help, observe your
      surroundings. Look to see if the bystander effect is in action and
      take measures to make sure the person gets help. If you aren’t
      able to help, notify an adult or authority figure that can.

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   aggression
      seeking to cause harm or pain to another person ^
   bullying
      a person, often an adolescent, being treated negatively repeatedly
      and over time ^
   bystander effect
      situation in which a witness or bystander does not volunteer to
      help a victim or person in distress ^
   cyberbullying
      repeated behavior that is intended to cause psychological or
      emotional harm to another person and that takes place online ^
   diffusion of responsibility
      tendency for no one in a group to help because the responsibility
      to help is spread throughout the group ^
   hostile aggression
      aggression motivated by feelings of anger with intent to cause
      pain ^
   instrumental aggression
      aggression motivated by achieving a goal and does not necessarily
      involve intent to cause pain

.. |A photograph shows two monkeys face to face.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_12_06_dominance.jpg
.. |A photograph shows a young person looking at a handheld electronic device.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_12_06_cyberbully.jpg
