====================
Regulation of Stress
====================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Define coping and
   differentiate between problem-focused and emotion-focused coping \*
   Describe the importance of perceived control in our reactions to
   stress \* Explain how social support is vital in health and longevity

As we learned in the previous section, **stress**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis}—especially if it is chronic—takes a toll on our bodies and
can have enormously negative health implications. When we experience
events in our lives that we appraise as stressful, it is essential that
we use effective coping strategies to manage our stress. **Coping**\ {:
data-type=“term”} refers to mental and behavioral efforts that we use to
deal with problems relating to stress, including its presumed cause and
the unpleasant feelings and emotions it produces.

COPING STYLES
=============

Lazarus and Folkman (1984) distinguished two fundamental kinds of
coping: problem-focused coping and emotion-focused coping. In
problem-focused coping, one attempts to manage or alter the problem that
is causing one to experience stress (i.e., the stressor).
Problem-focused coping strategies are similar to strategies used in
everyday problem-solving: they typically involve identifying the
problem, considering possible solutions, weighing the costs and benefits
of these solutions, and then selecting an alternative (Lazarus &
Folkman, 1984). As an example, suppose Bradford receives a midterm
notice that he is failing statistics class. If Bradford adopts a
**problem-focused coping**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} approach
to managing his stress, he would be proactive in trying to alleviate the
source of the stress. He might contact his professor to discuss what
must be done to raise his grade, he might also decide to set aside two
hours daily to study statistics assignments, and he may seek tutoring
assistance. A problem-focused approach to managing stress means we
actively try to do things to address the problem.

Emotion-focused coping, in contrast, consists of efforts to change or
reduce the negative emotions associated with stress. These efforts may
include avoiding, minimizing, or distancing oneself from the problem, or
positive comparisons with others (“I’m not as bad off as she is”), or
seeking something positive in a negative event (“Now that I’ve been
fired, I can sleep in for a few days”). In some cases, **emotion-focused
coping**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} strategies involve
reappraisal, whereby the stressor is construed differently (and somewhat
self-deceptively) without changing its objective level of threat
(Lazarus & Folkman, 1984). For example, a person sentenced to federal
prison who thinks, “This will give me a great chance to network with
others,” is using reappraisal. If Bradford adopted an emotion-focused
approach to managing his midterm deficiency stress, he might watch a
comedy movie, play video games, or spend hours on Twitter to take his
mind off the situation. In a certain sense, emotion-focused coping can
be thought of as treating the symptoms rather than the actual cause.

While many stressors elicit both kinds of coping strategies,
problem-focused coping is more likely to occur when encountering
stressors we perceive as controllable, while emotion-focused coping is
more likely to predominate when faced with stressors that we believe we
are powerless to change (Folkman & Lazarus, 1980). Clearly,
emotion-focused coping is more effective in dealing with uncontrollable
stressors. For example, if at midnight you are stressing over a 40-page
paper due in the morning that you have not yet started, you are probably
better off recognizing the hopelessness of the situation and doing
something to take your mind off it; taking a problem-focused approach by
trying to accomplish this task would only lead to frustration, anxiety,
and even more stress.

Fortunately, most stressors we encounter can be modified and are, to
varying degrees, controllable. A person who cannot stand her job can
quit and look for work elsewhere; a middle-aged divorcee can find
another potential partner; the freshman who fails an exam can study
harder next time, and a breast lump does not necessarily mean that one
is fated to die of breast cancer.

CONTROL AND STRESS
==================

The desire and ability to predict events, make decisions, and affect
outcomes—that is, to enact control in our lives—is a basic tenet of
human behavior (Everly & Lating, 2002). Albert Bandura (1997) stated
that “the intensity and chronicity of human stress is governed largely
by perceived control over the demands of one’s life” (p. 262). As
cogently described in his statement, our reaction to potential stressors
depends to a large extent on how much control we feel we have over such
things. **Perceived control**\ {: data-type=“term”} is our beliefs about
our personal capacity to exert influence over and shape outcomes, and it
has major implications for our health and happiness (Infurna & Gerstorf,
2014). Extensive research has demonstrated that perceptions of personal
control are associated with a variety of favorable outcomes, such as
better physical and mental health and greater psychological well-being
(Diehl & Hay, 2010). Greater personal control is also associated with
lower reactivity to stressors in daily life. For example, researchers in
one investigation found that higher levels of perceived control at one
point in time were later associated with lower emotional and physical
reactivity to interpersonal stressors (Neupert, Almeida, & Charles,
2007). Further, a daily diary study with 34 older widows found that
their stress and anxiety levels were significantly reduced on days
during which the widows felt greater perceived control (Ong, Bergeman, &
Bisconti, 2005).

.. container:: psychology dig-deeper

   .. container::

      Learned Helplessness

   When we lack a sense of control over the events in our lives,
   particularly when those events are threatening, harmful, or noxious,
   the psychological consequences can be profound. In one of the better
   illustrations of this concept, psychologist Martin Seligman conducted
   a series of classic experiments in the 1960s (Seligman & Maier, 1967)
   in which dogs were placed in a chamber where they received electric
   shocks from which they could not escape. Later, when these dogs were
   given the opportunity to escape the shocks by jumping across a
   partition, most failed to even try; they seemed to just give up and
   passively accept any shocks the experimenters chose to administer. In
   comparison, dogs who were previously allowed to escape the shocks
   tended to jump the partition and escape the pain
   (`[link] <#CNX_Psych_14_04_Helpless>`__).

   |An illustration shows a dog about to jump over a partition
   separating an area of a floor delivering shocks from an area that
   doesn’t deliver shocks.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_14_04_Helpless}

   Seligman believed that the dogs who failed to try to escape the later
   shocks were demonstrating **learned helplessness**\ {:
   data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}: They had acquired a belief that they
   were powerless to do anything about the noxious stimulation they were
   receiving. Seligman also believed that the passivity and lack of
   initiative these dogs demonstrated was similar to that observed in
   human depression. Therefore, Seligman speculated that acquiring a
   sense of learned helplessness might be an important cause of
   depression in humans: Humans who experience negative life events that
   they believe they are unable to control may become helpless. As a
   result, they give up trying to control or change the situation and
   some may become depressed and show lack of initiative in future
   situations in which they can control the outcomes (Seligman, Maier, &
   Geer, 1968).

   Seligman and colleagues later reformulated the original learned
   helplessness model of depression (Abramson, Seligman, & Teasdale,
   1978). In their reformulation, they emphasized attributions (i.e., a
   mental explanation for why something occurred) that lead to the
   perception that one lacks control over negative outcomes are
   important in fostering a sense of learned helplessness. For example,
   suppose a coworker shows up late to work; your belief as to what
   caused the coworker’s tardiness would be an attribution (e.g., too
   much traffic, slept too late, or just doesn’t care about being on
   time).

   The reformulated version of Seligman’s study holds that the
   attributions made for negative life events contribute to depression.
   Consider the example of a student who performs poorly on a midterm
   exam. This model suggests that the student will make three kinds of
   attributions for this outcome: internal vs. external (believing the
   outcome was caused by his own personal inadequacies or by
   environmental factors), stable vs. unstable (believing the cause can
   be changed or is permanent), and global vs. specific (believing the
   outcome is a sign of inadequacy in most everything versus just this
   area). Assume that the student makes an internal (“I’m just not
   smart”), stable (“Nothing can be done to change the fact that I’m not
   smart”) and global (“This is another example of how lousy I am at
   everything”) attribution for the poor performance. The reformulated
   theory predicts that the student would perceive a lack of control
   over this stressful event and thus be especially prone to developing
   depression. Indeed, research has demonstrated that people who have a
   tendency to make internal, global, and stable attributions for bad
   outcomes tend to develop symptoms of depression when faced with
   negative life experiences (Peterson & Seligman, 1984).

   Seligman’s learned helplessness model has emerged over the years as a
   leading theoretical explanation for the onset of major depressive
   disorder. When you study psychological disorders, you will learn more
   about the latest reformulation of this model—now called hopelessness
   theory.

People who report higher levels of perceived control view their health
as controllable, thereby making it more likely that they will better
manage their health and engage in behaviors conducive to good health
(Bandura, 2004). Not surprisingly, greater perceived control has been
linked to lower risk of physical health problems, including declines in
physical functioning (Infurna, Gerstorf, Ram, Schupp, & Wagner, 2011),
heart attacks (Rosengren et al., 2004), and both cardiovascular disease
incidence (Stürmer, Hasselbach, & Amelang, 2006) and mortality from
cardiac disease (Surtees et al., 2010). In addition, longitudinal
studies of British civil servants have found that those in low-status
jobs (e.g., clerical and office support staff) in which the degree of
control over the job is minimal are considerably more likely to develop
heart disease than those with high-status jobs or considerable control
over their jobs (Marmot, Bosma, Hemingway, & Stansfeld, 1997).

The link between perceived control and health may provide an explanation
for the frequently observed relationship between social class and health
outcomes (Kraus, Piff, Mendoza-Denton, Rheinschmidt, & Keltner, 2012).
In general, research has found that more affluent individuals experience
better health mainly because they tend to believe that they can
personally control and manage their reactions to life’s stressors
(Johnson & Krueger, 2006). Perhaps buoyed by the perceived level of
control, individuals of higher social class may be prone to
overestimating the degree of influence they have over particular
outcomes. For example, those of higher social class tend to believe that
their votes have greater sway on election outcomes than do those of
lower social class, which may explain higher rates of voting in more
affluent communities (Krosnick, 1990). Other research has found that a
sense of perceived control can protect less affluent individuals from
poorer health, depression, and reduced life-satisfaction—all of which
tend to accompany lower social standing (Lachman & Weaver, 1998).

Taken together, findings from these and many other studies clearly
suggest that perceptions of control and coping abilities are important
in managing and coping with the stressors we encounter throughout life.

SOCIAL SUPPORT
==============

The need to form and maintain strong, stable relationships with others
is a powerful, pervasive, and fundamental human motive (Baumeister &
Leary, 1995). Building strong interpersonal relationships with others
helps us establish a network of close, caring individuals who can
provide social support in times of distress, sorrow, and fear. **Social
support**\ {: data-type=“term”} can be thought of as the soothing impact
of friends, family, and acquaintances (Baron & Kerr, 2003). Social
support can take many forms, including advice, guidance, encouragement,
acceptance, emotional comfort, and tangible assistance (such as
financial help). Thus, other people can be very comforting to us when we
are faced with a wide range of life stressors, and they can be extremely
helpful in our efforts to manage these challenges. Even in nonhuman
animals, species mates can offer social support during times of stress.
For example, elephants seem to be able to sense when other elephants are
stressed and will often comfort them with physical contact—such as a
trunk touch—or an empathetic vocal response (Krumboltz, 2014).

Scientific interest in the importance of social support first emerged in
the 1970s when health researchers developed an interest in the health
consequences of being socially integrated (Stroebe & Stroebe, 1996).
Interest was further fueled by longitudinal studies showing that social
connectedness reduced mortality. In one classic study, nearly 7,000
Alameda County, California, residents were followed over 9 years. Those
who had previously indicated that they lacked social and community ties
were more likely to die during the follow-up period than those with more
extensive social networks. Compared to those with the most social
contacts, isolated men and women were, respectively, 2.3 and 2.8 times
more likely to die. These trends persisted even after controlling for a
variety of health-related variables, such as smoking, alcohol
consumption, self-reported health at the beginning of the study, and
physical activity (Berkman & Syme, 1979).

Since the time of that study, social support has emerged as one of the
well-documented psychosocial factors affecting health outcomes (Uchino,
2009). A statistical review of 148 studies conducted between 1982 and
2007 involving over 300,000 participants concluded that individuals with
stronger social relationships have a 50% greater likelihood of survival
compared to those with weak or insufficient social relationships
(Holt-Lunstad, Smith, & Layton, 2010). According to the researchers, the
magnitude of the effect of social support observed in this study is
comparable with quitting smoking and exceeded many well-known risk
factors for mortality, such as obesity and physical inactivity
(`[link] <#CNX_Psych_14_04_SocialSupport>`__).

|Photograph A shows a large group of people holding hands with the sun
setting in the distance. Photograph B shows a close relationship between
three people by the water.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_14_04_SocialSupport}

A number of large-scale studies have found that individuals with low
levels of social support are at greater risk of mortality, especially
from cardiovascular disorders (Brummett et al., 2001). Further, higher
levels of social supported have been linked to better survival rates
following breast cancer (Falagas et al., 2007) and infectious diseases,
especially HIV infection (Lee & Rotheram-Borus, 2001). In fact, a person
with high levels of social support is less likely to contract a common
cold. In one study, 334 participants completed questionnaires assessing
their sociability; these individuals were subsequently exposed to a
virus that causes a common cold and monitored for several weeks to see
who became ill. Results showed that increased sociability was linearly
associated with a decreased probability of developing a cold (Cohen,
Doyle, Turner, Alper, & Skoner, 2003).

For many of us, friends are a vital source of social support. But what
if you found yourself in a situation in which you lacked friends or
companions? For example, suppose a popular high school student attends a
far-away college, does not know anyone, and has trouble making friends
and meaningful connections with others during the first semester. What
can be done? If real life social support is lacking, access to distant
friends via social media may help compensate. In a study of college
freshmen, those with few face-to-face friends on campus but who
communicated electronically with distant friends were less distressed
that those who did not (Raney & Troop-Gordon, 2012). Also, for some
people, our families—especially our parents—are a major source of social
support.

Social support appears to work by boosting the immune system, especially
among people who are experiencing stress (Uchino, Vaughn, Carlisle, &
Birmingham, 2012). In a pioneering study, spouses of cancer patients who
reported high levels of social support showed indications of better
immune functioning on two out of three immune functioning measures,
compared to spouses who were below the median on reported social support
(Baron, Cutrona, Hicklin, Russell, & Lubaroff, 1990). Studies of other
populations have produced similar results, including those of spousal
caregivers of dementia sufferers, medical students, elderly adults, and
cancer patients (Cohen & Herbert, 1996; Kiecolt-Glaser, McGuire, Robles,
& Glaser, 2002).

In addition, social support has been shown to reduce blood pressure for
people performing stressful tasks, such as giving a speech or performing
mental arithmetic (Lepore, 1998). In these kinds of studies,
participants are usually asked to perform a stressful task either alone,
with a stranger present (who may be either supportive or unsupportive),
or with a friend present. Those tested with a friend present generally
exhibit lower blood pressure than those tested alone or with a stranger
(Fontana, Diegnan, Villeneuve, & Lepore, 1999). In one study, 112 female
participants who performed stressful mental arithmetic exhibited lower
blood pressure when they received support from a friend rather than a
stranger, but only if the friend was a male (Phillips, Gallagher, &
Carroll, 2009). Although these findings are somewhat difficult to
interpret, the authors mention that it is possible that females feel
less supported and more evaluated by other females, particularly females
whose opinions they value.

Taken together, the findings above suggest one of the reasons social
support is connected to favorable health outcomes is because it has
several beneficial physiological effects in stressful situations.
However, it is also important to consider the possibility that social
support may lead to better health behaviors, such as a healthy diet,
exercising, smoking cessation, and cooperation with medical regimens
(Uchino, 2009).

.. container:: psychology dig-deeper

   .. container::

      Coping with Prejudice and Discrimination

   While having social support is quite beneficial, being the recipient
   of prejudicial attitudes and discriminatory behaviors is associated
   with a number of negative outcomes. In their literature review,
   Brondolo, Brady, Pencille, Beatty, and Contrada (2009) describe how
   racial **prejudice**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} and
   **discrimination**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} serve as
   unique, significant stressors for those who are the targets of such
   attitudes and behavior. Being the target of racism is associated with
   increased rates of depression, lowered self-esteem, hypertension, and
   cardiovascular disease.

   Given the complex and pervasive nature of racism as a stressor,
   Brondolo et al. (2009) point out the importance of coping with this
   specific stressor. Their review is aimed at determining which coping
   strategies are most effective at offsetting negative health outcomes
   associated with racism-related stress. The authors examine the
   effectiveness of three coping strategies: focusing on racial identity
   to handle race-related stress, **anger**\ {: data-type=“term”
   .no-emphasis} expression/suppression, and seeking social support.
   You’ve learned a bit about social support, so we’ll focus the
   remainder of this discussion on the potential coping strategies of
   focusing on racial identity and anger expression/suppression.

   Focusing on racial identity refers to the process by which a person
   comes to feel as if he belongs to a given racial group; this may
   increase a sense of pride associated with group membership. Brondolo
   et al. (2009) suggest that a strong sense of racial identity might
   help an individual who is the target of racism differentiate between
   prejudicial attitudes/behaviors that are directed toward his group as
   a whole rather than at him as a person. Furthermore, the sense of
   belonging to his group might alleviate the distress of being
   ostracized by others. However, the research literature on the
   effectiveness of this technique has produced mixed results.

   Anger expression/suppression refers to the options available as a
   function of the anger evoked by racial prejudice and discrimination.
   Put simply, a target of racist attitudes and behaviors can act upon
   her anger or suppress her anger. As discussed by Brondolo et
   al. (2009), there has been very little research on the effectiveness
   of either approach; the results are quite mixed with some showing
   anger expression and others showing anger suppression as the
   healthier option.

   In the end, racism-related stress is a complex issue and each of the
   coping strategies discussed here has strengths and weaknesses.
   Brondolo et al. (2009) argue that it is imperative that additional
   research be conducted to ascertain the most effective strategies for
   coping with the negative outcomes that are experienced by the targets
   of racism.

STRESS REDUCTION TECHNIQUES
===========================

Beyond having a sense of control and establishing social support
networks, there are numerous other means by which we can manage stress
(`[link] <#CNX_Psych_14_04_StressRed>`__). A common technique people use
to combat stress is **exercise**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}
(Salmon, 2001). It is well-established that exercise, both of long
(aerobic) and short (anaerobic) duration, is beneficial for both
physical and mental health (Everly & Lating, 2002). There is
considerable evidence that physically fit individuals are more resistant
to the adverse effects of stress and recover more quickly from stress
than less physically fit individuals (Cotton, 1990). In a study of more
than 500 Swiss police officers and emergency service personnel,
increased physical fitness was associated with reduced stress, and
regular exercise was reported to protect against stress-related health
problems (Gerber, Kellman, Hartman, & Pühse, 2010).

|Photograph A shows an exercise room with several treadmills, elliptical
machines, and stationary bikes. There are people exercising with
multiple televisions hanging from the ceiling in front of them.
Photograph B shows a person meditating next to a tree. Photograph C
shows two people sitting across from each other at a table, each in
front of a monitor. The person in the foreground has straps around the
head holding up wires or devices.|\ {: #CNX_Psych_14_04_StressRed}

One reason exercise may be beneficial is because it might buffer some of
the deleterious physiological mechanisms of stress. One study found rats
that exercised for six weeks showed a decrease in
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal responsiveness to mild stressors (Campeau
et al., 2010). In high-stress humans, exercise has been shown to prevent
telomere shortening, which may explain the common observation of a
youthful appearance among those who exercise regularly (Puterman et al.,
2010). Further, exercise in later adulthood appears to minimize the
detrimental effects of stress on the hippocampus and memory (Head,
Singh, & Bugg, 2012). Among cancer survivors, exercise has been shown to
reduce anxiety (Speck, Courneya, Masse, Duval, & Schmitz, 2010) and
depressive symptoms (Craft, VanIterson, Helenowski, Rademaker, &
Courneya, 2012). Clearly, exercise is a highly effective tool for
regulating stress.

In the 1970s, Herbert Benson, a cardiologist, developed a stress
reduction method called the **relaxation response technique**\ {:
data-type=“term”} (Greenberg, 2006). The relaxation response technique
combines relaxation with transcendental **meditation**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}, and consists of four components (Stein,
2001):

1. sitting upright on a comfortable chair with feet on the ground and
   body in a relaxed position,
2. a quiet environment with eyes closed,
3. repeating a word or a phrase—a mantra—to oneself, such as “alert
   mind, calm body,”
4. passively allowing the mind to focus on pleasant thoughts, such as
   nature or the warmth of your blood nourishing your body. {: type=“1”}

The relaxation response approach is conceptualized as a general approach
to stress reduction that reduces sympathetic arousal, and it has been
used effectively to treat people with high blood pressure (Benson &
Proctor, 1994).

Another technique to combat stress, **biofeedback**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, was developed by Gary Schwartz at Harvard University
in the early 1970s. Biofeedback is a technique that uses electronic
equipment to accurately measure a person’s neuromuscular and autonomic
activity—feedback is provided in the form of visual or auditory signals.
The main assumption of this approach is that providing somebody
biofeedback will enable the individual to develop strategies that help
gain some level of voluntary control over what are normally involuntary
bodily processes (Schwartz & Schwartz, 1995). A number of different
bodily measures have been used in biofeedback research, including facial
muscle movement, brain activity, and skin temperature, and it has been
applied successfully with individuals experiencing tension headaches,
high blood pressure, asthma, and phobias (Stein, 2001).

Summary
=======

When faced with stress, people must attempt to manage or cope with it.
In general, there are two basic forms of coping: problem-focused coping
and emotion-focused coping. Those who use problem-focused coping
strategies tend to cope better with stress because these strategies
address the source of stress rather than the resulting symptoms. To a
large extent, perceived control greatly impacts reaction to stressors
and is associated with greater physical and mental well-being. Social
support has been demonstrated to be a highly effective buffer against
the adverse effects of stress. Extensive research has shown that social
support has beneficial physiological effects for people, and it seems to
influence immune functioning. However, the beneficial effects of social
support may be related to its influence on promoting healthy behaviors.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Emotion-focused coping would likely be a better method than
      problem-focused coping for dealing with which of the following
      stressors?

      1. terminal cancer
      2. poor grades in school
      3. unemployment
      4. divorce {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      Studies of British civil servants have found that those in the
      lowest status jobs are much more likely to develop heart disease
      than those who have high status jobs. These findings attest to the
      importance of \_______\_ in dealing with stress.

      1. biofeedback
      2. social support
      3. perceived control
      4. emotion-focused coping {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      Relative to those with low levels of social support, individuals
      with high levels of social support \________.

      1. are more likely to develop asthma
      2. tend to have less perceived control
      3. are more likely to develop cardiovascular disorders
      4. tend to tolerate stress well {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      The concept of learned helplessness was formulated by Seligman to
      explain the \________.

      1. inability of dogs to attempt to escape avoidable shocks after
         having received inescapable shocks
      2. failure of dogs to learn to from prior mistakes
      3. ability of dogs to learn to help other dogs escape situations
         in which they are receiving uncontrollable shocks
      4. inability of dogs to learn to help other dogs escape situations
         in which they are receiving uncontrollable electric shocks {:
         type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Although problem-focused coping seems to be a more effective
      strategy when dealing with stressors, do you think there are any
      kinds of stressful situations in which emotion-focused coping
      might be a better strategy?

   .. container::

      Emotion-focused coping would likely be a better coping strategy in
      situations in which a stressor is uncontrollable, or in which
      nothing could otherwise be done about it, such as a fatal illness.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Describe how social support can affect health both directly and
      indirectly.

   .. container::

      Social support seems to have a direct effect on immune system
      functioning. Social support can affect health indirectly by
      influencing health-related behaviors, such as exercise and eating
      properly.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Try to think of an example in which you coped with a particular
      stressor by using problem-focused coping. What was the stressor?
      What did your problem-focused efforts involve? Were they
      effective?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   biofeedback
      stress-reduction technique using electronic equipment to measure a
      person’s involuntary (neuromuscular and autonomic) activity and
      provide feedback to help the person gain a level of voluntary
      control over these processes ^
   coping
      mental or behavioral efforts used to manage problems relating to
      stress, including its cause and the unpleasant feelings and
      emotions it produces ^
   perceived control
      peoples’ beliefs concerning their capacity to influence and shape
      outcomes in their lives ^
   relaxation response technique
      stress reduction technique combining elements of relaxation and
      meditation ^
   social support
      soothing and often beneficial support of others; can take
      different forms, such as advice, guidance, encouragement,
      acceptance, emotional comfort, and tangible assistance

.. |An illustration shows a dog about to jump over a partition separating an area of a floor delivering shocks from an area that doesn’t deliver shocks.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_14_04_Helpless.jpg
.. |Photograph A shows a large group of people holding hands with the sun setting in the distance. Photograph B shows a close relationship between three people by the water.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_14_04_Support.jpg
.. |Photograph A shows an exercise room with several treadmills, elliptical machines, and stationary bikes. There are people exercising with multiple televisions hanging from the ceiling in front of them. Photograph B shows a person meditating next to a tree. Photograph C shows two people sitting across from each other at a table, each in front of a monitor. The person in the foreground has straps around the head holding up wires or devices.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_14_04_StressRed.jpg
