==============
Mood Disorders
==============



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Distinguish
   normal states of sadness and euphoria from states of depression and
   mania \* Describe the symptoms of major depressive disorder and
   bipolar disorder \* Understand the differences between major
   depressive disorder and persistent depressive disorder, and identify
   two subtypes of depression \* Define the criteria for a manic episode
   \* Understand genetic, biological, and psychological explanations of
   major depressive disorder \* Discuss the relationship between mood
   disorders and suicidal ideation, as well as factors associated with
   suicide

Blake cries all day and feeling that he is worthless and his life is
hopeless, he cannot get out of bed. Crystal stays up all night, talks
very rapidly, and went on a shopping spree in which she spent $3,000 on
furniture, although she cannot afford it. Maria recently had a baby, and
she feels overwhelmed, teary, anxious, and panicked, and believes she is
a terrible mother—practically every day since the baby was born. All
these individuals demonstrate symptoms of a potential mood disorder.

**Mood disorders**\ {: data-type=“term”}
(`[link] <#Figure_15_07_Moods>`__) are characterized by severe
disturbances in mood and emotions—most often depression, but also mania
and elation (Rothschild, 1999). All of us experience fluctuations in our
moods and emotional states, and often these fluctuations are caused by
events in our lives. We become elated if our favorite team wins the
World Series and dejected if a romantic relationship ends or if we lose
our job. At times, we feel fantastic or miserable for no clear reason.
People with mood disorders also experience mood fluctuations, but their
fluctuations are extreme, distort their outlook on life, and impair
their ability to function.

|A photograph shows a person sitting in a fetal position.|\ {:
#Figure_15_07_Moods}

The DSM-5 lists two general categories of mood disorders. **Depressive
disorders**\ {: data-type=“term”} are a group of disorders in which
**depression**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} is the main feature.
Depression is a vague term that, in everyday language, refers to an
intense and persistent sadness. Depression is a heterogeneous mood
state—it consists of a broad spectrum of symptoms that range in
severity. Depressed people feel sad, discouraged, and hopeless. These
individuals lose interest in activities once enjoyed, often experience a
decrease in drives such as hunger and sex, and frequently doubt personal
worth. Depressive disorders vary by degree, but this chapter highlights
the most well-known: major depressive disorder (sometimes called
unipolar depression).

**Bipolar and related disorders**\ {: data-type=“term”} are a group of
disorders in which mania is the defining feature. **Mania**\ {:
data-type=“term”} is a state of extreme elation and agitation. When
people experience mania, they may become extremely talkative, behave
recklessly, or attempt to take on many tasks simultaneously. The most
recognized of these disorders is bipolar disorder.

MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER
=========================

According to the DSM-5, the defining symptoms of **major depressive
disorder**\ {: data-type=“term”} include “depressed mood most of the
day, nearly every day” (feeling sad, empty, hopeless, or appearing
tearful to others), and loss of interest and pleasure in usual
activities (APA, 2013). In addition to feeling overwhelmingly sad most
of each day, people with depression will no longer show interest or
enjoyment in activities that previously were gratifying, such as
hobbies, sports, sex, social events, time spent with family, and so on.
Friends and family members may notice that the person has completely
abandoned previously enjoyed hobbies; for example, an avid tennis player
who develops major depressive disorder no longer plays tennis
(Rothschild, 1999).

To receive a diagnosis of major depressive disorder, one must experience
a total of five symptoms for at least a two-week period; these symptoms
must cause significant distress or impair normal functioning, and they
must not be caused by substances or a medical condition. At least one of
the two symptoms mentioned above must be present, plus any combination
of the following symptoms (APA, 2013):

-  significant weight loss (when not dieting) or weight gain and/or
   significant decrease or increase in appetite;
-  difficulty falling asleep or sleeping too much;
-  psychomotor agitation (the person is noticeably fidgety and jittery,
   demonstrated by behaviors like the inability to sit, pacing,
   hand-wringing, pulling or rubbing of the skin, clothing, or other
   objects) or psychomotor retardation (the person talks and moves
   slowly, for example, talking softly, very little, or in a monotone);
-  fatigue or loss of energy;
-  feelings of worthlessness or guilt;
-  difficulty concentrating and indecisiveness; and
-  **suicidal ideation**\ {: data-type=“term”}: thoughts of death (not
   just fear of dying), thinking about or planning suicide, or making an
   actual suicide attempt.

Major depressive disorder is considered episodic: its symptoms are
typically present at their full magnitude for a certain period of time
and then gradually abate. Approximately 50%–60% of people who experience
an episode of major depressive disorder will have a second episode at
some point in the future; those who have had two episodes have a 70%
chance of having a third episode, and those who have had three episodes
have a 90% chance of having a fourth episode (Rothschild, 1999).
Although the episodes can last for months, a majority a people diagnosed
with this condition (around 70%) recover within a year. However, a
substantial number do not recover; around 12% show serious signs of
impairment associated with major depressive disorder after 5 years
(Boland & Keller, 2009). In the long-term, many who do recover will
still show minor symptoms that fluctuate in their severity (Judd, 2012).

Results of Major Depressive Disorder
------------------------------------

Major depressive disorder is a serious and incapacitating condition that
can have a devastating effect on the quality of one’s life. The person
suffering from this disorder lives a profoundly miserable existence that
often results in unavailability for work or education, abandonment of
promising careers, and lost wages; occasionally, the condition requires
hospitalization. The majority of those with major depressive disorder
report having faced some kind of discrimination, and many report that
having received such treatment has stopped them from initiating close
relationships, applying for jobs for which they are qualified, and
applying for education or training (Lasalvia et al., 2013). Major
depressive disorder also takes a toll on health. Depression is a risk
factor for the development of heart disease in healthy patients, as well
as adverse cardiovascular outcomes in patients with preexisting heart
disease (Whooley, 2006).

Risk Factors for Major Depressive Disorder
------------------------------------------

Major depressive disorder is often referred to as the common cold of
psychiatric disorders. Around 6.6% of the U.S. population experiences
major depressive disorder each year; 16.9% will experience the disorder
during their lifetime (Kessler & Wang, 2009). It is more common among
women than among men, affecting approximately 20% of women and 13% of
men at some point in their life (National Comorbidity Survey, 2007). The
greater risk among women is not accounted for by a tendency to report
symptoms or to seek help more readily, suggesting that gender
differences in the rates of major depressive disorder may reflect
biological and gender-related environmental experiences (Kessler, 2003).

Lifetime rates of major depressive disorder tend to be highest in North
and South America, Europe, and Australia; they are considerably lower in
Asian countries (Hasin, Fenton, & Weissman, 2011). The rates of major
depressive disorder are higher among younger age cohorts than among
older cohorts, perhaps because people in younger age cohorts are more
willing to admit depression (Kessler & Wang, 2009).

A number of risk factors are associated with major depressive disorder:
unemployment (including homemakers); earning less than $20,000 per year;
living in urban areas; or being separated, divorced, or widowed (Hasin
et al., 2011). Comorbid disorders include anxiety disorders and
substance abuse disorders (Kessler & Wang, 2009).

SUBTYPES OF DEPRESSION
======================

The DSM-5 lists several different subtypes of depression. These
subtypes—what the DSM-5 refer to as specifiers—are not specific
disorders; rather, they are labels used to indicate specific patterns of
symptoms or to specify certain periods of time in which the symptoms may
be present. One subtype, **seasonal pattern**\ {: data-type=“term”},
applies to situations in which a person experiences the symptoms of
major depressive disorder only during a particular time of year (e.g.,
fall or winter). In everyday language, people often refer to this
subtype as the winter blues.

Another subtype, **peripartum onset**\ {: data-type=“term”} (commonly
referred to as **postpartum depression**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis}), applies to women who experience major depression during
pregnancy or in the four weeks following the birth of their child (APA,
2013). These women often feel very anxious and may even have panic
attacks. They may feel guilty, agitated, and be weepy. They may not want
to hold or care for their newborn, even in cases in which the pregnancy
was desired and intended. In extreme cases, the mother may have feelings
of wanting to harm her child or herself. In a horrific illustration, a
woman named Andrea Yates, who suffered from extreme peripartum-onset
depression (as well as other mental illnesses), drowned her five
children in a bathtub (Roche, 2002). Most women with peripartum-onset
depression do not physically harm their children, but most do have
difficulty being adequate caregivers (Fields, 2010). A surprisingly high
number of women experience symptoms of peripartum-onset depression. A
study of 10,000 women who had recently given birth found that 14%
screened positive for peripartum-onset depression, and that nearly 20%
reported having thoughts of wanting to harm themselves (Wisner et al.,
2013).

People with **persistent depressive disorder**\ {: data-type=“term”}
(previously known as dysthymia) experience depressed moods most of the
day nearly every day for at least two years, as well as at least two of
the other symptoms of major depressive disorder. People with persistent
depressive disorder are chronically sad and melancholy, but do not meet
all the criteria for major depression. However, episodes of full-blown
major depressive disorder can occur during persistent depressive
disorder (APA, 2013).

BIPOLAR DISORDER
================

A person with **bipolar disorder**\ {: data-type=“term”} (commonly known
as **manic depression**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}) often
experiences mood states that vacillate between depression and mania;
that is, the person’s mood is said to alternate from one emotional
extreme to the other (in contrast to unipolar, which indicates a
persistently sad mood).

To be diagnosed with bipolar disorder, a person must have experienced a
manic episode at least once in his life; although major depressive
episodes are common in bipolar disorder, they are not required for a
diagnosis (APA, 2013). According to the DSM-5, a **manic episode**\ {:
data-type=“term”} is characterized as a “distinct period of abnormally
and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and abnormally
and persistently increased activity or energy lasting at least one
week,” that lasts most of the time each day (APA, 2013, p. 124). During
a manic episode, some experience a mood that is almost euphoric and
become excessively talkative, sometimes spontaneously starting
conversations with strangers; others become excessively irritable and
complain or make hostile comments. The person may talk loudly and
rapidly, exhibiting **flight of ideas**\ {: data-type=“term”}, abruptly
switching from one topic to another. These individuals are easily
distracted, which can make a conversation very difficult. They may
exhibit grandiosity, in which they experience inflated but unjustified
self-esteem and self-confidence. For example, they might quit a job in
order to “strike it rich” in the stock market, despite lacking the
knowledge, experience, and capital for such an endeavor. They may take
on several tasks at the same time (e.g., several time-consuming projects
at work) and yet show little, if any, need for sleep; some may go for
days without sleep. Patients may also recklessly engage in pleasurable
activities that could have harmful consequences, including spending
sprees, reckless driving, making foolish investments, excessive
gambling, or engaging in sexual encounters with strangers (APA, 2013).

During a manic episode, individuals usually feel as though they are not
ill and do not need treatment. However, the reckless behaviors that
often accompany these episodes—which can be antisocial, illegal, or
physically threatening to others—may require involuntary hospitalization
(APA, 2013). Some patients with bipolar disorder will experience a
rapid-cycling subtype, which is characterized by at least four manic
episodes (or some combination of at least four manic and major
depressive episodes) within one year.

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   In the 1997 independent film *Sweetheart*, actress Janeane Garofalo
   plays the part of Jasmine, a young woman with bipolar disorder. Watch
   `this firsthand
   account <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XrJmKiwxrfU>`__ from a
   person living with bipolar disorder.

Risk Factors for Bipolar Disorder
---------------------------------

Bipolar disorder is considerably less frequent than major depressive
disorder. In the United States, 1 out of every 167 people meets the
criteria for bipolar disorder each year, and 1 out of 100 meet the
criteria within their lifetime (Merikangas et al., 2011). The rates are
higher in men than in women, and about half of those with this disorder
report onset before the age of 25 (Merikangas et al., 2011). Around 90%
of those with bipolar disorder have a comorbid disorder, most often an
anxiety disorder or a substance abuse problem. Unfortunately, close to
half of the people suffering from bipolar disorder do not receive
treatment (Merikangas & Tohen, 2011). Suicide rates are extremely high
among those with bipolar disorder: around 36% of individuals with this
disorder attempt suicide at least once in their lifetime (Novick,
Swartz, & Frank, 2010), and between 15%–19% complete suicide (Newman,
2004).

THE BIOLOGICAL BASIS OF MOOD DISORDERS
======================================

Mood disorders have been shown to have a strong genetic and biological
basis. Relatives of those with major depressive disorder have double the
risk of developing major depressive disorder, whereas relatives of
patients with bipolar disorder have over nine times the risk (Merikangas
et al., 2011). The rate of concordance for major depressive disorder is
higher among identical twins than fraternal twins (50% vs. 38%,
respectively), as is that of bipolar disorder (67% vs. 16%,
respectively), suggesting that genetic factors play a stronger role in
bipolar disorder than in major depressive disorder (Merikangas et
al. 2011).

People with mood disorders often have imbalances in certain
neurotransmitters, particularly norepinephrine and serotonin (Thase,
2009). These neurotransmitters are important regulators of the bodily
functions that are disrupted in mood disorders, including appetite, sex
drive, sleep, arousal, and mood. Medications that are used to treat
major depressive disorder typically boost serotonin and norepinephrine
activity, whereas lithium—used in the treatment of bipolar
disorder—blocks norepinephrine activity at the synapses
(`[link] <#Figure_15_07_Neurons>`__).

|An illustration shows the synaptic space between two neurons with
neurotransmitters being released into the synapse and attaching to
receptors.|\ {: #Figure_15_07_Neurons}

Depression is linked to abnormal activity in several regions of the
brain (Fitzgerald, Laird, Maller, & Daskalakis, 2008) including those
important in assessing the emotional significance of stimuli and
experiencing emotions (amygdala), and in regulating and controlling
emotions (like the prefrontal cortex, or PFC) (LeMoult, Castonguay,
Joormann, & McAleavey, 2013). Depressed individuals show elevated
amygdala activity (Drevets, Bogers, & Raichle, 2002), especially when
presented with negative emotional stimuli, such as photos of sad faces
(`[link] <#Figure_15_07_SadFace>`__) (Surguladze et al., 2005).
Interestingly, heightened amygdala activation to negative emotional
stimuli among depressed persons occurs even when stimuli are presented
outside of conscious awareness (Victor, Furey, Fromm, Öhman, & Drevets,
2010), and it persists even after the negative emotional stimuli are no
longer present (Siegle, Thompson, Carter, Steinhauer, & Thase, 2007).
Additionally, depressed individuals exhibit less activation in the
prefrontal, particularly on the left side (Davidson, Pizzagalli, &
Nitschke, 2009). Because the PFC can dampen amygdala activation, thereby
enabling one to suppress negative emotions (Phan et al., 2005),
decreased activation in certain regions of the PFC may inhibit its
ability to override negative emotions that might then lead to more
negative mood states (Davidson et al., 2009). These findings suggest
that depressed persons are more prone to react to emotionally negative
stimuli, yet have greater difficulty controlling these reactions.

|A photograph shows a sad-looking dog.|\ {: #Figure_15_07_SadFace}

Since the 1950s, researchers have noted that depressed individuals have
abnormal levels of cortisol, a stress hormone released into the blood by
the neuroendocrine system during times of stress (Mackin & Young, 2004).
When cortisol is released, the body initiates a fight-or-flight response
in reaction to a threat or danger. Many people with depression show
elevated cortisol levels (Holsboer & Ising, 2010), especially those
reporting a history of early life trauma such as the loss of a parent or
abuse during childhood (Baes, Tofoli, Martins, & Juruena, 2012). Such
findings raise the question of whether high cortisol levels are a cause
or a consequence of depression. High levels of cortisol are a risk
factor for future depression (Halligan, Herbert, Goodyer, & Murray,
2007), and cortisol activates activity in the amygdala while
deactivating activity in the PFC (McEwen, 2005)—both brain disturbances
are connected to depression. Thus, high cortisol levels may have a
causal effect on depression, as well as on its brain function
abnormalities (van Praag, 2005). Also, because stress results in
increased cortisol release (Michaud, Matheson, Kelly, Anisman, 2008), it
is equally reasonable to assume that stress may precipitate depression.

A Diathesis-Stress Model and Major Depressive Disorders
-------------------------------------------------------

Indeed, it has long been believed that stressful life events can trigger
depression, and research has consistently supported this conclusion
(Mazure, 1998). Stressful life events include significant losses, such
as death of a loved one, divorce or separation, and serious health and
money problems; life events such as these often precede the onset of
depressive episodes (Brown & Harris, 1989). In particular, exit
events—instances in which an important person departs (e.g., a death,
divorce or separation, or a family member leaving home)—often occur
prior to an episode (Paykel, 2003). Exit events are especially likely to
trigger depression if these happenings occur in a way that humiliates or
devalues the individual. For example, people who experience the breakup
of a relationship initiated by the other person develop major depressive
disorder at a rate more than 2 times that of people who experience the
death of a loved one (Kendler, Hettema, Butera, Gardner, & Prescott,
2003).

Likewise, individuals who are exposed to traumatic stress during
childhood—such as separation from a parent, family turmoil, and
maltreatment (physical or sexual abuse)—are at a heightened risk of
developing depression at any point in their lives (Kessler, 1997). A
recent review of 16 studies involving over 23,000 subjects concluded
that those who experience childhood maltreatment are more than 2 times
as likely to develop recurring and persistent depression (Nanni, Uher, &
Danese, 2012).

Of course, not everyone who experiences stressful life events or
childhood adversities succumbs to depression—indeed, most do not.
Clearly, a diathesis-stress interpretation of major depressive disorder,
in which certain predispositions or vulnerability factors influence
one’s reaction to stress, would seem logical. If so, what might such
predispositions be? A study by Caspi and others (2003) suggests that an
alteration in a specific gene that regulates **serotonin**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} (the 5-HTTLPR gene) might be one culprit.
These investigators found that people who experienced several stressful
life events were significantly more likely to experience episodes of
major depression if they carried one or two short versions of this gene
than if they carried two long versions. Those who carried one or two
short versions of the 5-HTTLPR gene were unlikely to experience an
episode, however, if they had experienced few or no stressful life
events. Numerous studies have replicated these findings, including
studies of people who experienced maltreatment during childhood (Goodman
& Brand, 2009). In a recent investigation conducted in the United
Kingdom (Brown & Harris, 2013), researchers found that childhood
maltreatment before age 9 elevated the risk of chronic adult depression
(a depression episode lasting for at least 12 months) among those
individuals having one (LS) or two (SS) short versions of the 5-HTTLPR
gene (`[link] <#Figure_15_07_GxE_Interaction>`__). Childhood
maltreatment did not increase the risk for chronic depression for those
have two long (LL) versions of this gene. Thus, genetic vulnerability
may be one mechanism through which stress potentially leads to
depression.

|A bar graph has an x-axis labeled “version of 5-HTTLPR gene” and a
y-axis labeled “percent of chronic depression in adulthood.” Data
compares the type of gene combination and whether childhood maltreatment
occurred prior to age 9. People with no childhood maltreatment prior to
age 9 have a percentage of chronic depression of approximately 23% with
the long-long gene, 19% with the long-short gene, and 20% with the
short-short gene. People with childhood maltreatment prior to age 9 have
a percentage of chronic depression of approximately 22% with the
long-long gene, 53% with the long-short gene, and 71% with the
short-short gene.|\ {: #Figure_15_07_GxE_Interaction}

Cognitive Theories of Depression
--------------------------------

Cognitive theories of depression take the view that depression is
triggered by negative thoughts, interpretations, self-evaluations, and
expectations (Joormann, 2009). These **diathesis-stress models**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} propose that depression is triggered by a
“cognitive vulnerability” (negative and maladaptive thinking) and by
precipitating stressful life events (Gotlib & Joormann, 2010). Perhaps
the most well-known cognitive theory of depression was developed in the
1960s by psychiatrist Aaron Beck, based on clinical observations and
supported by research (Beck, 2008). Beck theorized that depression-prone
people possess depressive schemas, or mental predispositions to think
about most things in a negative way (Beck, 1976). Depressive schemas
contain themes of loss, failure, rejection, worthlessness, and
inadequacy, and may develop early in childhood in response to adverse
experiences, then remain dormant until they are activated by stressful
or negative life events. Depressive schemas prompt dysfunctional and
pessimistic thoughts about the self, the world, and the future. Beck
believed that this dysfunctional style of thinking is maintained by
cognitive biases, or errors in how we process information about
ourselves, which lead us to focus on negative aspects of experiences,
interpret things negatively, and block positive memories (Beck, 2008). A
person whose depressive schema consists of a theme of rejection might be
overly attentive to social cues of rejection (more likely to notice
another’s frown), and he might interpret this cue as a sign of rejection
and automatically remember past incidents of rejection. Longitudinal
studies have supported Beck’s theory, in showing that a preexisting
tendency to engage in this negative, self-defeating style of
thinking—when combined with life stress—over time predicts the onset of
depression (Dozois & Beck, 2008). Cognitive therapies for depression,
aimed at changing a depressed person’s negative thinking, were developed
as an expansion of this theory (Beck, 1976).

Another cognitive theory of depression, **hopelessness theory**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, postulates that a particular style of negative
thinking leads to a sense of hopelessness, which then leads to
depression (Abramson, Metalsky, & Alloy, 1989). According to this
theory, hopelessness is an expectation that unpleasant outcomes will
occur or that desired outcomes will not occur, and there is nothing one
can do to prevent such outcomes. A key assumption of this theory is that
hopelessness stems from a tendency to perceive negative life events as
having stable (“It’s never going to change”) and global (“It’s going to
affect my whole life”) causes, in contrast to unstable (“It’s fixable”)
and specific (“It applies only to this particular situation”) causes,
especially if these negative life events occur in important life realms,
such as relationships, academic achievement, and the like. Suppose a
student who wishes to go to law school does poorly on an admissions
test. If the student infers negative life events as having stable and
global causes, she may believe that her poor performance has a stable
and global cause (“I lack intelligence, and it’s going to prevent me
from ever finding a meaningful career”), as opposed to an unstable and
specific cause (“I was sick the day of the exam, so my low score was a
fluke”). Hopelessness theory predicts that people who exhibit this
cognitive style in response to undesirable life events will view such
events as having negative implications for their future and self-worth,
thereby increasing the likelihood of hopelessness—the primary cause of
depression (Abramson et al., 1989). One study testing hopelessness
theory measured the tendency to make negative inferences for bad life
effects in participants who were experiencing uncontrollable stressors.
Over the ensuing six months, those with scores reflecting high cognitive
vulnerability were 7 times more likely to develop depression compared to
those with lower scores (Kleim, Gonzalo, & Ehlers, 2011).

A third cognitive theory of depression focuses on how people’s thoughts
about their distressed moods—depressed symptoms in particular—can
increase the risk and duration of depression. This theory, which focuses
on rumination in the development of depression, was first described in
the late 1980s to explain the higher rates of depression in women than
in men (Nolen-Hoeksema, 1987). **Rumination**\ {: data-type=“term”} is
the repetitive and passive focus on the fact that one is depressed and
dwelling on depressed symptoms, rather that distracting one’s self from
the symptoms or attempting to address them in an active, problem-solving
manner (Nolen-Hoeksema, 1991). When people ruminate, they have thoughts
such as “Why am I so unmotivated? I just can’t get going. I’m never
going to get my work done feeling this way” (Nolen-Hoeksema & Hilt,
2009, p. 393). Women are more likely than men to ruminate when they are
sad or depressed (Butler & Nolen-Hoeksema, 1994), and the tendency to
ruminate is associated with increases in depression symptoms
(Nolen-Hoeksema, Larson, & Grayson, 1999), heightened risk of major
depressive episodes (Abela & Hankin, 2011), and chronicity of such
episodes (Robinson & Alloy, 2003)

SUICIDE
=======

For some people with mood disorders, the extreme emotional pain they
experience becomes unendurable. Overwhelmed by hopelessness, devastated
by incapacitating feelings of worthlessness, and burdened with the
inability to adequately cope with such feelings, they may consider
suicide to be a reasonable way out. **Suicide**\ {: data-type=“term”},
defined by the CDC as “death caused by self-directed injurious behavior
with any intent to die as the result of the behavior” (CDC, 2013a), in a
sense represents an outcome of several things going wrong all at the
same time Crosby, Ortega, & Melanson, 2011). Not only must the person be
biologically or psychologically vulnerable, but he must also have the
means to perform the suicidal act, and he must lack the necessary
protective factors (e.g., social support from friends and family,
religion, coping skills, and problem-solving skills) that provide
comfort and enable one to cope during times of crisis or great
psychological pain (Berman, 2009).

Suicide is not listed as a disorder in the DSM-5; however, suffering
from a mental disorder—especially a mood disorder—poses the greatest
risk for suicide. Around 90% of those who complete suicides have a
diagnosis of at least one mental disorder, with mood disorders being the
most frequent (Fleischman, Bertolote, Belfer, & Beautrais, 2005). In
fact, the association between major depressive disorder and suicide is
so strong that one of the criteria for the disorder is thoughts of
suicide, as discussed above (APA, 2013).

Suicide rates can be difficult to interpret because some deaths that
appear to be accidental may in fact be acts of suicide (e.g., automobile
crash). Nevertheless, investigations into U.S. suicide rates have
uncovered these facts:

-  Suicide was the 10th leading cause of death for all ages in 2010
   (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2012).
-  There were 38,364 suicides in 2010 in the United States—an average of
   105 each day (CDC, 2012).
-  Suicide among males is 4 times higher than among females and accounts
   for 79% of all suicides; firearms are the most commonly used method
   of suicide for males, whereas poisoning is the most commonly used
   method for females (CDC, 2012).
-  From 1991 to 2003, suicide rates were consistently higher among those
   65 years and older. Since 2001, however, suicide rates among those
   ages 25–64 have risen consistently, and, since 2006, suicide rates
   have been greater for those ages 65 and older (CDC, 2013b). This
   increase in suicide rates among middle-aged Americans has prompted
   concern in some quarters that baby boomers (individuals born between
   1946–1964) who face economic worry and easy access to prescription
   medication may be particularly vulnerable to suicide (Parker-Pope,
   2013).
-  The highest rates of suicide within the United States are among
   American Indians/Alaskan natives and Non-Hispanic Whites (CDC,
   2013b).
-  Suicide rates vary across the United States, with the highest rates
   consistently found in the mountain states of the west (Alaska,
   Montana, Nevada, Wyoming, Colorado, and Idaho) (Berman, 2009).

Contrary to popular belief, suicide rates peak during the springtime
(April and May), not during the holiday season or winter. In fact,
suicide rates are generally lowest during the winter months (Postolache
et al., 2010).

RISK FACTORS FOR SUICIDE
========================

Suicidal risk is especially high among people with substance abuse
problems. Individuals with alcohol dependence are at 10 times greater
risk for suicide than the general population (Wilcox, Conner, & Caine,
2004). The risk of suicidal behavior is especially high among those who
have made a prior suicide attempt. Among those who attempt suicide, 16%
make another attempt within a year and over 21% make another attempt
within four years (Owens, Horrocks, & House, 2002). Suicidal individuals
may be at high risk for terminating their life if they have a lethal
means in which to act, such as a firearm in the home (Brent & Bridge,
2003). Withdrawal from social relationships, feeling as though one is a
burden to others, and engaging in reckless and risk-taking behaviors may
be precursors to suicidal behavior (Berman, 2009). A sense of entrapment
or feeling unable to escape one’s miserable feelings or external
circumstances (e.g., an abusive relationship with no perceived way out)
predicts suicidal behavior (O’Connor, Smyth, Ferguson, Ryan, & Williams,
2013). Tragically, reports of suicides among adolescents following
instances of cyberbullying have emerged in recent years. In one
widely-publicized case a few years ago, Phoebe Prince, a 15-year-old
Massachusetts high school student, committed suicide following incessant
harassment and taunting from her classmates via texting and Facebook
(McCabe, 2010).

Suicides can have a contagious effect on people. For example, another’s
suicide, especially that of a family member, heightens one’s risk of
suicide (Agerbo, Nordentoft, & Mortensen, 2002). Additionally,
widely-publicized suicides tend to trigger copycat suicides in some
individuals. One study examining suicide statistics in the United States
from 1947–1967 found that the rates of suicide skyrocketed for the first
month after a suicide story was printed on the front page of the *New
York Times* (Phillips, 1974). Austrian researchers found a significant
increase in the number of suicides by firearms in the three weeks
following extensive reports in Austria’s largest newspaper of a
celebrity suicide by gun (Etzersdorfer, Voracek, & Sonneck, 2004). A
review of 42 studies concluded that media coverage of celebrity suicides
is more than 14 times more likely to trigger copycat suicides than is
coverage of non-celebrity suicides (Stack, 2000). This review also
demonstrated that the medium of coverage is important: televised stories
are considerably less likely to prompt a surge in suicides than are
newspaper stories. Research suggests that a trend appears to be emerging
whereby people use online social media to leave suicide notes, although
it is not clear to what extent suicide notes on such media might induce
copycat suicides (Ruder, Hatch, Ampanozi, Thali, & Fischer, 2011).
Nevertheless, it is reasonable to conjecture that suicide notes left by
individuals on social media may influence the decisions of other
vulnerable people who encounter them (Luxton, June, & Fairall, 2012).

One possible contributing factor in suicide is brain chemistry.
Contemporary neurological research shows that disturbances in the
functioning of **serotonin**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} are
linked to suicidal behavior (Pompili et al., 2010). Low levels of
serotonin predict future suicide attempts and suicide completions, and
low levels have been observed post-mortem among suicide victims (Mann,
2003). Serotonin dysfunction, as noted earlier, is also known to play an
important role in depression; low levels of serotonin have also been
linked to aggression and impulsivity (Stanley et al., 2000). The
combination of these three characteristics constitutes a potential
formula for suicide—especially violent suicide. A classic study
conducted during the 1970s found that patients with major depressive
disorder who had very low levels of serotonin attempted suicide more
frequently and more violently than did patients with higher levels
(Asberg, Thorén, Träskman, Bertilsson, & Ringberger, 1976; Mann, 2003).

Suicidal thoughts, plans, and even off-hand remarks (“I might kill
myself this afternoon”) should always be taken extremely seriously.
People who contemplate terminating their life need immediate help. Below
are links to two excellent websites that contain resources (including
hotlines) for people who are struggling with suicidal ideation, have
loved ones who may be suicidal, or who have lost loved ones to suicide:
http://www.afsp.org and http://suicidology.org.

Summary
=======

Mood disorders are those in which the person experiences severe
disturbances in mood and emotion. They include depressive disorders and
bipolar and related disorders. Depressive disorders include major
depressive disorder, which is characterized by episodes of profound
sadness and loss of interest or pleasure in usual activities and other
associated features, and persistent depressive disorder, which marked by
a chronic state of sadness. Bipolar disorder is characterized by mood
states that vacillate between sadness and euphoria; a diagnosis of
bipolar disorder requires experiencing at least one manic episode, which
is defined as a period of extreme euphoria, irritability, and increased
activity. Mood disorders appear to have a genetic component, with
genetic factors playing a more prominent role in bipolar disorder than
in depression. Both biological and psychological factors are important
in the development of depression. People who suffer from mental health
problems, especially mood disorders, are at heightened risk for suicide.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Common symptoms of major depressive disorder include all of the
      following *except* \________.

      1. periods of extreme elation and euphoria
      2. difficulty concentrating and making decisions
      3. loss of interest or pleasure in usual activities
      4. psychomotor agitation and retardation {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      Suicide rates are \_______\_ among men than among women, and they
      are \_______\_ during the winter holiday season than during the
      spring months.

      1. higher; higher
      2. lower; lower
      3. higher; lower
      4. lower; higher {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

Critical Thinking Question
==========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Describe several of the factors associated with suicide.

   .. container::

      The risk of suicide is high among people with mental health
      problems, including mood disorders and substance abuse problems.
      The risk is also high among those who have made a prior suicide
      attempt and who have lethal means to commit suicide. Rates of
      suicide are higher among men and during the springtime, and they
      are higher in the mountain states of the west than in other
      regions of the United States. Research has also shown that
      suicides can have a “contagious” effect on people, and that it is
      associated with serotonin dysfunction.

Personal Application Question
=============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Think of someone you know who seems to have a tendency to make
      negative, self-defeating explanations for negative life events.
      How might this tendency lead to future problems? What steps do you
      think could be taken to change this thinking style?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   bipolar and related disorders
      group of mood disorders in which mania is the defining feature ^
   bipolar disorder
      mood disorder characterized by mood states that vacillate between
      depression and mania ^
   depressive disorder
      one of a group of mood disorders in which depression is the
      defining feature ^
   flight of ideas
      symptom of mania that involves an abruptly switching in
      conversation from one topic to another ^
   hopelessness theory
      cognitive theory of depression proposing that a style of thinking
      that perceives negative life events as having stable and global
      causes leads to a sense of hopelessness and then to depression ^
   major depressive disorder
      commonly referred to as “depression” or “major depression,”
      characterized by sadness or loss of pleasure in usual activities,
      as well other symptoms ^
   mania
      state of extreme elation and agitation ^
   manic episode
      period in which an individual experiences mania, characterized by
      extremely cheerful and euphoric mood, excessive talkativeness,
      irritability, increased activity levels, and other symptoms ^
   mood disorder
      one of a group of disorders characterized by severe disturbances
      in mood and emotions; the categories of mood disorders listed in
      the DSM-5 are bipolar and related disorders and depressive
      disorders ^
   peripartum onset
      subtype of depression that applies to women who experience an
      episode of major depression either during pregnancy or in the four
      weeks following childbirth ^
   persistent depressive disorder
      depressive disorder characterized by a chronically sad and
      melancholy mood ^
   rumination
      in depression, tendency to repetitively and passively dwell on
      one’s depressed symptoms, their meanings, and their consequences ^
   seasonal pattern
      subtype of depression in which a person experiences the symptoms
      of major depressive disorder only during a particular time of year
      ^
   suicidal ideation
      thoughts of death by suicide, thinking about or planning suicide,
      or making a suicide attempt ^
   suicide
      death caused by intentional, self-directed injurious behavior

.. |A photograph shows a person sitting in a fetal position.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_15_07_Moods.jpg
.. |An illustration shows the synaptic space between two neurons with neurotransmitters being released into the synapse and attaching to receptors.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_15_07_Neurons.jpg
.. |A photograph shows a sad-looking dog.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_15_07_SadFace.jpg
.. |A bar graph has an x-axis labeled “version of 5-HTTLPR gene” and a y-axis labeled “percent of chronic depression in adulthood.” Data compares the type of gene combination and whether childhood maltreatment occurred prior to age 9. People with no childhood maltreatment prior to age 9 have a percentage of chronic depression of approximately 23% with the long-long gene, 19% with the long-short gene, and 20% with the short-short gene. People with childhood maltreatment prior to age 9 have a percentage of chronic depression of approximately 22% with the long-long gene, 53% with the long-short gene, and 71% with the short-short gene.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_15_07_GxE_Interaction.jpg
