==================================================
Diagnosing and Classifying Psychological Disorders
==================================================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Explain why
   classification systems are necessary in the study of psychopathology
   \* Describe the basic features of the Diagnostic and Statistical
   Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) \* Discuss changes
   in the DSM over time, including criticisms of the current edition \*
   Identify which disorders are generally the most common

A first step in the study of psychological disorders is carefully and
systematically discerning significant signs and symptoms. How do mental
health professionals ascertain whether or not a person’s inner states
and behaviors truly represent a psychological disorder? Arriving at a
proper **diagnosis**\ {: data-type=“term”}—that is, appropriately
identifying and labeling a set of defined symptoms—is absolutely
crucial. This process enables professionals to use a common language
with others in the field and aids in communication about the disorder
with the patient, colleagues and the public. A proper diagnosis is an
essential element to guide proper and successful treatment. For these
reasons, classification systems that organize psychological disorders
systematically are necessary.

*THE DIAGNOSTIC AND STATISTICAL MANUAL OF MENTAL DISORDERS* (DSM)
=================================================================

Although a number of classification systems have been developed over
time, the one that is used by most mental health professionals in the
United States is the **Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-5)**\ {: data-type=“term”}, published by the American
Psychiatric Association (2013). (Note that the American Psychiatric
Association differs from the American Psychological Association; both
are abbreviated APA.) The first edition of the DSM, published in 1952,
classified psychological disorders according to a format developed by
the U.S. Army during World War II (Clegg, 2012). In the years since, the
DSM has undergone numerous revisions and editions. The most recent
edition, published in 2013, is the DSM-5 (APA, 2013). The DSM-5 includes
many categories of disorders (e.g., anxiety disorders, depressive
disorders, and dissociative disorders). Each disorder is described in
detail, including an overview of the disorder (diagnostic features),
specific symptoms required for diagnosis (diagnostic criteria),
prevalence information (what percent of the population is thought to be
afflicted with the disorder), and risk factors associated with the
disorder. `[link] <#Figure_15_02_Disorders>`__ shows lifetime prevalence
rates—the percentage of people in a population who develop a disorder in
their lifetime—of various psychological disorders among U.S. adults.
These data were based on a national sample of 9,282 U.S. residents
(National Comorbidity Survey, 2007).

|A bar graph has an x-axis labeled “DSM disorder” and a y-axis labeled
“Lifetime prevalence rates.” For each disorder, a prevalence rate is
given for total population, females, and males. The approximate data
shown is: “major depressive disorder” 17% total, 20% females, 13% males;
“alcohol abuse” 13% total, 7% females, 20% males; “specific phobia” 13%
total, 16% females, 8% males; “social anxiety disorder” 12% total, 13%
females, 11% males; “drug abuse” 8% total, 5% females, 12% males;
“posttraumatic stress disorder” 7% total, 10% females, 3% males;
“generalized anxiety disorder” 6% total, 7% females, 4% males; “panic
disorder” 5% total, 6% females, 3% males; “obsessive-compulsive
disorder” 3% total, 3% females, 2% males; “dysthymia” 3% total, 3%
females, 2% males.|\ {: #Figure_15_02_Disorders}

The DSM-5 also provides information about **comorbidity**\ {:
data-type=“term”}; the co-occurrence of two disorders. For example, the
DSM-5 mentions that 41% of people with obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD) also meet the diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder
(`[link] <#Figure_15_02_Comorbidity>`__). Drug use is highly comorbid
with other mental illnesses; 6 out of 10 people who have a substance use
disorder also suffer from another form of mental illness (National
Institute on Drug Abuse [NIDA], 2007).

|A Venn-diagram shows two overlapping circles. One circle is titled
“Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder” and the other is titled “Major
Depressive Disorder.” The area in which these two circles overlap
includes forty-one percent of each circle. This area is titled
“Comorbidity 41%.”|\ {: #Figure_15_02_Comorbidity}

The DSM has changed considerably in the half-century since it was
originally published. The first two editions of the DSM, for example,
listed homosexuality as a disorder; however, in 1973, the APA voted to
remove it from the manual (Silverstein, 2009). Additionally, beginning
with the DSM-III in 1980, mental disorders have been described in much
greater detail, and the number of diagnosable conditions has grown
steadily, as has the size of the manual itself. DSM-I included 106
diagnoses and was 130 total pages, whereas DSM-III included more than 2
times as many diagnoses (265) and was nearly seven times its size (886
total pages) (Mayes & Horowitz, 2005). Although DSM-5 is longer than
DSM-IV, the volume includes only 237 disorders, a decrease from the 297
disorders that were listed in DSM-IV. The latest edition, DSM-5,
includes revisions in the organization and naming of categories and in
the diagnostic criteria for various disorders (Regier, Kuhl, & Kupfer,
2012), while emphasizing careful consideration of the importance of
gender and cultural difference in the expression of various symptoms
(Fisher, 2010).

Some believe that establishing new diagnoses might overpathologize the
human condition by turning common human problems into mental illnesses
(The Associated Press, 2013). Indeed, the finding that nearly half of
all Americans will meet the criteria for a DSM disorder at some point in
their life (Kessler et al., 2005) likely fuels much of this skepticism.
The DSM-5 is also criticized on the grounds that its diagnostic criteria
have been loosened, thereby threatening to “turn our current diagnostic
inflation into diagnostic hyperinflation” (Frances, 2012, para. 22). For
example, DSM-IV specified that the symptoms of major depressive disorder
must not be attributable to normal bereavement (loss of a loved one).
The DSM-5, however, has removed this bereavement exclusion, essentially
meaning that grief and sadness after a loved one’s death can constitute
major depressive disorder.

THE INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
============================================

A second classification system, the **International Classification of
Diseases (ICD)**\ {: data-type=“term”}, is also widely recognized.
Published by the World Health Organization (WHO), the ICD was developed
in Europe shortly after World War II and, like the DSM, has been revised
several times. The categories of psychological disorders in both the DSM
and ICD are similar, as are the criteria for specific disorders;
however, some differences exist. Although the ICD is used for clinical
purposes, this tool is also used to examine the general health of
populations and to monitor the prevalence of diseases and other health
problems internationally (WHO, 2013). The ICD is in its 10th edition
(ICD-10); however, efforts are now underway to develop a new edition
(ICD-11) that, in conjunction with the changes in DSM-5, will help
harmonize the two classification systems as much as possible (APA,
2013).

A study that compared the use of the two classification systems found
that worldwide the ICD is more frequently used for clinical diagnosis,
whereas the DSM is more valued for research (Mezzich, 2002). Most
research findings concerning the etiology and treatment of psychological
disorders are based on criteria set forth in the DSM (Oltmanns &
Castonguay, 2013). The DSM also includes more explicit disorder
criteria, along with an extensive and helpful explanatory text (Regier
et al., 2012). The DSM is the classification system of choice among U.S.
mental health professionals, and this chapter is based on the DSM
paradigm.

THE COMPASSIONATE VIEW OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
=================================================

As these disorders are outlined, please bear two things in mind. First,
remember that psychological disorders represent *extremes* of inner
experience and behavior. If, while reading about these disorders, you
feel that these descriptions begin to personally characterize you, do
not worry—this moment of enlightenment probably means nothing more than
you are normal. Each of us experiences episodes of sadness, anxiety, and
preoccupation with certain thoughts—times when we do not quite feel
ourselves. These episodes should not be considered problematic unless
the accompanying thoughts and behaviors become extreme and have a
disruptive effect on one’s life. Second, understand that people with
psychological disorders are far more than just embodiments of their
disorders. We do not use terms such as schizophrenics, depressives, or
phobics because they are labels that objectify people who suffer from
these conditions, thus promoting biased and disparaging assumptions
about them. It is important to remember that a psychological disorder is
not what a person *is*; it is something that a person *has*—through no
fault of his or her own. As is the case with cancer or diabetes, those
with psychological disorders suffer debilitating, often painful
conditions that are not of their own choosing. These individuals deserve
to be viewed and treated with compassion, understanding, and dignity.

Summary
=======

The diagnosis and classification of psychological disorders is essential
in studying and treating psychopathology. The classification system used
by most U.S. professionals is the DSM-5. The first edition of the DSM
was published in 1952, and has undergone numerous revisions. The 5th and
most recent edition, the DSM-5, was published in 2013. The diagnostic
manual includes a total of 237 specific diagnosable disorders, each
described in detail, including its symptoms, prevalence, risk factors,
and comorbidity. Over time, the number of diagnosable conditions listed
in the DSM has grown steadily, prompting criticism from some.
Nevertheless, the diagnostic criteria in the DSM are more explicit than
that of any other system, which makes the DSM system highly desirable
for both clinical diagnosis and research.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      The letters in the abbreviation DSM-5 stand for \________.

      1. Diseases and Statistics Manual of Medicine
      2. Diagnosable Standards Manual of Mental Disorders
      3. Diseases and Symptoms Manual of Mental Disorders
      4. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders {:
         type=“a”}

   .. container::

      D

.. container::

   .. container::

      A study based on over 9,000 U. S. residents found that the most
      prevalent disorder was \________.

      1. major depressive disorder
      2. social anxiety disorder
      3. obsessive-compulsive disorder
      4. specific phobia {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Describe the DSM-5. What is it, what kind of information does it
      contain, and why is it important to the study and treatment of
      psychological disorders?

   .. container::

      The DSM-5 is the classification system of psychological disorders
      preferred by most U.S. mental health professionals, and it is
      published by the American Psychiatric Association (APA). It
      consists of broad categories of disorders and specific disorders
      that fall within each category. Each disorder has an explicit
      description of its symptoms, as well as information concerning
      prevalence, risk factors, and comorbidity. The DSM-5 provides a
      common language that enables mental health professionals to
      communicate effectively about sets of symptoms.

.. container::

   .. container::

      The International Classification of Diseases (ICD) and the DSM
      differ in various ways. What are some of the differences in these
      two classification systems?

   .. container::

      The ICD is used primarily for making clinical diagnoses and more
      broadly for examining the general health of populations and
      monitoring the international prevalence of diseases and other
      health problems. While the DSM is also used for diagnostic
      purposes, it is also highly valued as a research tool. For
      example, much of the data regarding the etiology and treatment of
      psychological disorders are based on diagnostic criteria set forth
      in the DSM.

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   comorbidity
      co-occurrence of two disorders in the same individual ^
   diagnosis
      determination of which disorder a set of symptoms represents ^
   *Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition* (DSM-5)
      authoritative index of mental disorders and the criteria for their
      diagnosis; published by the American Psychiatric Association (APA)
      ^
   *International Classification of Diseases* (ICD)
      authoritative index of mental and physical diseases, including
      infectious diseases, and the criteria for their diagnosis;
      published by the World Health Organization (WHO)

.. |A bar graph has an x-axis labeled “DSM disorder” and a y-axis labeled “Lifetime prevalence rates.” For each disorder, a prevalence rate is given for total population, females, and males. The approximate data shown is: “major depressive disorder” 17% total, 20% females, 13% males; “alcohol abuse” 13% total, 7% females, 20% males; “specific phobia” 13% total, 16% females, 8% males; “social anxiety disorder” 12% total, 13% females, 11% males; “drug abuse” 8% total, 5% females, 12% males; “posttraumatic stress disorder” 7% total, 10% females, 3% males; “generalized anxiety disorder” 6% total, 7% females, 4% males; “panic disorder” 5% total, 6% females, 3% males; “obsessive-compulsive disorder” 3% total, 3% females, 2% males; “dysthymia” 3% total, 3% females, 2% males.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_15_02_Disorders.jpg
.. |A Venn-diagram shows two overlapping circles. One circle is titled “Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder” and the other is titled “Major Depressive Disorder.” The area in which these two circles overlap includes forty-one percent of each circle. This area is titled “Comorbidity 41%.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_15_02_Comorbidity.jpg
