=================
Anxiety Disorders
=================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Distinguish
   normal anxiety from pathological anxiety \* List and describe the
   major anxiety disorders, including their main features and prevalence
   \* Describe basic psychological and biological factors that are
   suspected to be important in the etiology of anxiety disorder

Everybody experiences anxiety from time to time. Although anxiety is
closely related to fear, the two states possess important differences.
Fear involves an instantaneous reaction to an imminent threat, whereas
anxiety involves apprehension, avoidance, and cautiousness regarding a
potential threat, danger, or other negative event (Craske, 1999). While
anxiety is unpleasant to most people, it is important to our health,
safety, and well-being. Anxiety motivates us to take actions—such as
preparing for exams, watching our weight, showing up to work on
time—that enable us to avert potential future problems. Anxiety also
motivates us to avoid certain things—such as running up debts and
engaging in illegal activities—that could lead to future trouble. Most
individuals’ level and duration of anxiety approximates the magnitude of
the potential threat they face. For example, suppose a single woman in
her late 30s who wishes to marry is concerned about the possibility of
having to settle for a spouse who is less attractive and educated than
desired. This woman likely would experience anxiety of greater intensity
and duration than would a 21-year-old college junior who is having
trouble finding a date for the annual social. Some people, however,
experience anxiety that is excessive, persistent, and greatly out of
proportion to the actual threat; if one’s anxiety has a disruptive
influence on one’s life, this is a strong indicator that the individual
is experiencing an anxiety disorder.

**Anxiety disorders**\ {: data-type=“term”} are characterized by
excessive and persistent fear and anxiety, and by related disturbances
in behavior (APA, 2013). Although anxiety is universally experienced,
anxiety disorders cause considerable distress. As a group, anxiety
disorders are common: approximately 25%–30% of the U.S. population meets
the criteria for at least one anxiety disorder during their lifetime
(Kessler et al., 2005). Also, these disorders appear to be much more
common in women than they are in men; within a 12-month period, around
23% of women and 14% of men will experience at least one anxiety
disorder (National Comorbidity Survey, 2007). Anxiety disorders are the
most frequently occurring class of mental disorders and are often
comorbid with each other and with other mental disorders (Kessler,
Ruscio, Shear, & Wittchen, 2009).

SPECIFIC PHOBIA
===============

*Phobia* is a Greek word that means fear. A person diagnosed with a
**specific phobia**\ {: data-type=“term”} (formerly known as simple
**phobia**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}) experiences excessive,
distressing, and persistent fear or anxiety about a specific object or
situation (such as animals, enclosed spaces, elevators, or flying) (APA,
2013). Even though people realize their level of fear and anxiety in
relation to the phobic stimulus is irrational, some people with a
specific phobia may go to great lengths to avoid the phobic stimulus
(the object or situation that triggers the fear and anxiety). Typically,
the fear and anxiety a phobic stimulus elicits is disruptive to the
person’s life. For example, a man with a phobia of flying might refuse
to accept a job that requires frequent air travel, thus negatively
affecting his career. Clinicians who have worked with people who have
specific phobias have encountered many kinds of phobias, some of which
are shown in `[link] <#Table_15_04_01>`__.

.. raw:: html

   <table id="Table_15_04_01" summary="A table of two columns lists phobias and their associated feared object or situation. Acrophobia is fear of heights, aerophobia is fear of flying, arachnophobia is fear of spiders, claustrophobia is fear of enclosed spaces, cynophobia is fear of dogs, hematophobia is fear of blood, ophidiophobia is fear of snakes, taphophobia is fear of being buried alive, trypanophobia is fear of injections, and xenophobia is fear of strangers.">

.. raw:: html

   <caption>

Specific Phobias

.. raw:: html

   </caption>

.. raw:: html

   <thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Phobia

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Feared Object or Situation

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tbody>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Acrophobia

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

heights

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Aerophobia

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

flying

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Arachnophobia

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

spiders

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Claustrophobia

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

enclosed spaces

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Cynophobia

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

dogs

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Hematophobia

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

blood

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Ophidiophobia

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

snakes

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Taphophobia

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

being buried alive

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Trypanophobia

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

injections

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Xenophobia

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

strangers

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </tbody>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

Specific phobias are common; in the United States, around 12.5% of the
population will meet the criteria for a specific phobia at some point in
their lifetime (Kessler et al., 2005). One type of phobia,
**agoraphobia**\ {: data-type=“term”}, is listed in the DSM-5 as a
separate anxiety disorder. Agoraphobia, which literally means “fear of
the marketplace,” is characterized by intense fear, anxiety, and
avoidance of situations in which it might be difficult to escape or
receive help if one experiences symptoms of a panic attack (a state of
extreme anxiety that we will discuss shortly). These situations include
public transportation, open spaces (parking lots), enclosed spaces
(stores), crowds, or being outside the home alone (APA, 2013). About
1.4% of Americans experience agoraphobia during their lifetime (Kessler
et al., 2005).

ACQUISITION OF PHOBIAS THROUGH LEARNING
=======================================

Many theories suggest that phobias develop through learning. Rachman
(1977) proposed that phobias can be acquired through three major
learning pathways. The first pathway is through **classical
conditioning**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}. As you may recall,
classical conditioning is a form of learning in which a previously
neutral stimulus is paired with an unconditioned stimulus (UCS) that
reflexively elicits an unconditioned response (UCR), eliciting the same
response through its association with the unconditioned stimulus. The
response is called a conditioned response (CR). For example, a child who
has been bitten by a dog may come to fear dogs because of her past
association with pain. In this case, the dog bite is the UCS and the
fear it elicits is the UCR. Because a dog was associated with the bite,
any dog may come to serve as a conditioned stimulus, thereby eliciting
fear; the fear the child experiences around dogs, then, becomes a CR.

The second pathway of phobia acquisition is through vicarious learning,
such as **modeling**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}. For example, a
child who observes his cousin react fearfully to spiders may later
express the same fears, even though spiders have never presented any
danger to him. This phenomenon has been observed in both humans and
nonhuman primates (Olsson & Phelps, 2007). A study of laboratory-reared
monkeys readily acquired a fear of snakes after observing wild-reared
monkeys react fearfully to snakes (Mineka & Cook, 1993).

The third pathway is through verbal transmission or information. For
example, a child whose parents, siblings, friends, and classmates
constantly tell her how disgusting and dangerous snakes are may come to
acquire a fear of snakes.

Interestingly, people are more likely to develop phobias of things that
do not represent much actual danger to themselves, such as animals and
heights, and are less likely to develop phobias toward things that
present legitimate danger in contemporary society, such as motorcycles
and weapons (Öhman & Mineka, 2001). Why might this be so? One theory
suggests that the human brain is evolutionarily predisposed to more
readily associate certain objects or situations with fear (Seligman,
1971). This theory argues that throughout our evolutionary history, our
ancestors associated certain stimuli (e.g., snakes, spiders, heights,
and thunder) with potential danger. As time progressed, the mind has
become adapted to more readily develop fears of these things than of
others. Experimental evidence has consistently demonstrated that
conditioned fears develop more readily to fear-relevant stimuli (images
of snakes and spiders) than to fear-irrelevant stimuli (images of
flowers and berries) (Öhman & Mineka, 2001). Such prepared learning has
also been shown to occur in monkeys. In one study (Cook & Mineka, 1989),
monkeys watched videotapes of model monkeys reacting fearfully to either
fear-relevant stimuli (toy snakes or a toy crocodile) or fear-irrelevant
stimuli (flowers or a toy rabbit). The observer monkeys developed fears
of the fear-relevant stimuli but not the fear-irrelevant stimuli.

SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER
=======================

**Social anxiety disorder**\ {: data-type=“term”} (formerly called
social phobia) is characterized by extreme and persistent fear or
anxiety and avoidance of social situations in which the person could
potentially be evaluated negatively by others (APA, 2013). As with
specific phobias, social anxiety disorder is common in the United
States; a little over 12% of all Americans experience social anxiety
disorder during their lifetime (Kessler et al., 2005).

The heart of the fear and anxiety in social anxiety disorder is the
person’s concern that he may act in a humiliating or embarrassing way,
such as appearing foolish, showing symptoms of anxiety (blushing), or
doing or saying something that might lead to rejection (such as
offending others). The kinds of social situations in which individuals
with social anxiety disorder usually have problems include public
speaking, having a conversation, meeting strangers, eating in
restaurants, and, in some cases, using public restrooms. Although many
people become anxious in social situations like public speaking, the
fear, anxiety, and avoidance experienced in social anxiety disorder are
highly distressing and lead to serious impairments in life. Adults with
this disorder are more likely to experience lower educational attainment
and lower earnings (Katzelnick et al., 2001), perform more poorly at
work and are more likely to be unemployed (Moitra, Beard, Weisberg, &
Keller, 2011), and report greater dissatisfaction with their family
lives, friends, leisure activities, and income (Stein & Kean, 2000).

When people with social anxiety disorder are unable to avoid situations
that provoke anxiety, they typically perform **safety behaviors**\ {:
data-type=“term”}: mental or behavioral acts that reduce anxiety in
social situations by reducing the chance of negative social outcomes.
Safety behaviors include avoiding eye contact, rehearsing sentences
before speaking, talking only briefly, and not talking about oneself
(Alden & Bieling, 1998). Other examples of safety behaviors include the
following (Marker, 2013):

-  assuming roles in social situations that minimize interaction with
   others (e.g., taking pictures, setting up equipment, or helping
   prepare food)
-  asking people many questions to keep the focus off of oneself
-  selecting a position to avoid scrutiny or contact with others
   (sitting in the back of the room)
-  wearing bland, neutral clothes to avoid drawing attention to oneself
-  avoiding substances or activities that might cause anxiety symptoms
   (such as caffeine, warm clothing, and physical exercise)

Although these behaviors are intended to prevent the person with social
anxiety disorder from doing something awkward that might draw criticism,
these actions usually exacerbate the problem because they do not allow
the individual to disconfirm his negative beliefs, often eliciting
rejection and other negative reactions from others (Alden & Bieling,
1998).

People with social anxiety disorder may resort to self-medication, such
as drinking alcohol, as a means to avert the anxiety symptoms they
experience in social situations (Battista & Kocovski, 2010). The use of
alcohol when faced with such situations may become negatively
reinforcing: encouraging individuals with social anxiety disorder to
turn to the substance whenever they experience anxiety symptoms. The
tendency to use alcohol as a coping mechanism for social anxiety,
however, can come with a hefty price tag: a number of large scale
studies have reported a high rate of comorbidity between social anxiety
disorder and alcohol use disorder (Morris, Stewart, & Ham, 2005).

As with specific phobias, it is highly probable that the fears inherent
to social anxiety disorder can develop through conditioning experiences.
For example, a child who is subjected to early unpleasant social
experiences (e.g., bullying at school) may develop negative social
images of herself that become activated later in anxiety-provoking
situations (Hackmann, Clark, & McManus, 2000). Indeed, one study
reported that 92% of a sample of adults with social anxiety disorder
reported a history of severe teasing in childhood, compared to only 35%
of a sample of adults with panic disorder (McCabe, Antony, Summerfeldt,
Liss, & Swinson, 2003).

One of the most well-established risk factors for developing social
anxiety disorder is behavioral inhibition (Clauss & Blackford, 2012).
Behavioral inhibition is thought to be an inherited trait, and it is
characterized by a consistent tendency to show fear and restraint when
presented with unfamiliar people or situations (Kagan, Reznick, &
Snidman, 1988). Behavioral inhibition is displayed very early in life;
behaviorally inhibited toddlers and children respond with great caution
and restraint in unfamiliar situations, and they are often timid,
fearful, and shy around unfamiliar people (Fox, Henderson, Marshall,
Nichols, & Ghera, 2005). A recent statistical review of studies
demonstrated that behavioral inhibition was associated with more than a
sevenfold increase in the risk of development of social anxiety
disorder, demonstrating that behavioral inhibition is a major risk
factor for the disorder (Clauss & Blackford, 2012).

PANIC DISORDER
==============

Imagine that you are at the mall one day with your friends and—suddenly
and inexplicably—you begin sweating and trembling, your heart starts
pounding, you have trouble breathing, and you start to feel dizzy and
nauseous. This episode lasts for 10 minutes and is terrifying because
you start to think that you are going to die. When you visit your doctor
the following morning and describe what happened, she tells you that you
have experienced a panic attack (`[link] <#Figure_15_04_Panic>`__). If
you experience another one of these episodes two weeks later and worry
for a month or more that similar episodes will occur in the future, it
is likely that you have developed panic disorder.

|A diagram shows an outline of a person’s upper body. Within this
outline, some of the major organs appear. The brain is labeled, “Feeling
dizzy, unsteady, lightheaded.” The heart is labeled, “Chest pain,
palpitations and/or accelerated heart rate.” The lungs are labeled,
“Shortness of breath.” The stomach is labeled, “Nausea or abdominal
distress.”|\ {: #Figure_15_04_Panic}

People with **panic disorder**\ {: data-type=“term”} experience
recurrent (more than one) and unexpected panic attacks, along with at
least one month of persistent concern about additional panic attacks,
worry over the consequences of the attacks, or self-defeating changes in
behavior related to the attacks (e.g., avoidance of exercise or
unfamiliar situations) (APA, 2013). As is the case with other anxiety
disorders, the panic attacks cannot result from the physiological
effects of drugs and other substances, a medical condition, or another
mental disorder. A **panic attack**\ {: data-type=“term”} is defined as
a period of extreme fear or discomfort that develops abruptly and
reaches a peak within 10 minutes. Its symptoms include accelerated heart
rate, sweating, trembling, choking sensations, hot flashes or chills,
dizziness or lightheadedness, fears of losing control or going crazy,
and fears of dying (APA, 2013). Sometimes panic attacks are expected,
occurring in response to specific environmental triggers (such as being
in a tunnel); other times, these episodes are unexpected and emerge
randomly (such as when relaxing). According to the DSM-5, the person
must experience unexpected panic attacks to qualify for a diagnosis of
panic disorder.

Experiencing a panic attack is often terrifying. Rather than recognizing
the symptoms of a panic attack merely as signs of intense anxiety,
individuals with panic disorder often misinterpret them as a sign that
something is intensely wrong internally (thinking, for example, that the
pounding heart represents an impending heart attack). Panic attacks can
occasionally precipitate trips to the emergency room because several
symptoms of panic attacks are, in fact, similar to those associated with
heart problems (e.g., palpitations, racing pulse, and a pounding
sensation in the chest) (Root, 2000). Unsurprisingly, those with panic
disorder fear future attacks and may become preoccupied with modifying
their behavior in an effort to avoid future panic attacks. For this
reason, panic disorder is often characterized as fear of fear (Goldstein
& Chambless, 1978).

Panic attacks themselves are not mental disorders. Indeed, around 23% of
Americans experience isolated panic attacks in their lives without
meeting the criteria for panic disorder (Kessler et al., 2006),
indicating that panic attacks are fairly common. Panic disorder is, of
course, much less common, afflicting 4.7% of Americans during their
lifetime (Kessler et al., 2005). Many people with panic disorder develop
agoraphobia, which is marked by fear and avoidance of situations in
which escape might be difficult or help might not be available if one
were to develop symptoms of a panic attack. People with panic disorder
often experience a comorbid disorder, such as other anxiety disorders or
major depressive disorder (APA, 2013).

Researchers are not entirely sure what causes panic disorder. Children
are at a higher risk of developing panic disorder if their parents have
the disorder (Biederman et al., 2001), and family and twins studies
indicate that the heritability of panic disorder is around 43% (Hettema,
Neale, & Kendler, 2001). The exact genes and gene functions involved in
this disorder, however, are not well-understood (APA, 2013).
Neurobiological theories of panic disorder suggest that a region of the
brain called the **locus coeruleus**\ {: data-type=“term”} may play a
role in this disorder. Located in the brainstem, the locus coeruleus is
the brain’s major source of norepinephrine, a neurotransmitter that
triggers the body’s fight-or-flight response. Activation of the locus
coeruleus is associated with anxiety and fear, and research with
nonhuman primates has shown that stimulating the locus coeruleus either
electrically or through drugs produces panic-like symptoms (Charney et
al., 1990). Such findings have led to the theory that panic disorder may
be caused by abnormal norepinephrine activity in the locus coeruleus
(Bremner, Krystal, Southwick, & Charney, 1996).

Conditioning theories of panic disorder propose that panic attacks are
**classical conditioning**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} responses
to subtle bodily sensations resembling those normally occurring when one
is anxious or frightened (Bouton, Mineka, & Barlow, 2001). For example,
consider a child who has asthma. An acute asthma attack produces
sensations, such as shortness of breath, coughing, and chest tightness,
that typically elicit fear and anxiety. Later, when the child
experiences subtle symptoms that resemble the frightening symptoms of
earlier asthma attacks (such as shortness of breath after climbing
stairs), he may become anxious, fearful, and then experience a panic
attack. In this situation, the subtle symptoms would represent a
conditioned stimulus, and the panic attack would be a conditioned
response. The finding that panic disorder is nearly three times as
frequent among people with asthma as it is among people without asthma
(Weiser, 2007) supports the possibility that panic disorder has the
potential to develop through classical conditioning.

Cognitive factors may play an integral part in panic disorder.
Generally, cognitive theories (Clark, 1996) argue that those with panic
disorder are prone to interpret ordinary bodily sensations
catastrophically, and these fearful interpretations set the stage for
panic attacks. For example, a person might detect bodily changes that
are routinely triggered by innocuous events such getting up from a
seated position (dizziness), exercising (increased heart rate, shortness
of breath), or drinking a large cup of coffee (increased heart rate,
trembling). The individual interprets these subtle bodily changes
catastrophically (“Maybe I’m having a heart attack!”). Such
interpretations create fear and anxiety, which trigger additional
physical symptoms; subsequently, the person experiences a panic attack.
Support of this contention rests with findings that people with more
severe catastrophic thoughts about sensations have more frequent and
severe panic attacks, and among those with panic disorder, reducing
catastrophic cognitions about their sensations is as effective as
medication in reducing panic attacks (Good & Hinton, 2009).

GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
============================

Alex was always worried about many things. He worried that his children
would drown when they played at the beach. Each time he left the house,
he worried that an electrical short circuit would start a fire in his
home. He worried that his wife would lose her job at the prestigious law
firm. He worried that his daughter’s minor staph infection could turn
into a massive life-threatening condition. These and other worries
constantly weighed heavily on Alex’s mind, so much so that they made it
difficult for him to make decisions and often left him feeling tense,
irritable, and worn out. One night, Alex’s wife was to drive their son
home from a soccer game. However, his wife stayed after the game and
talked with some of the other parents, resulting in her arriving home 45
minutes late. Alex had tried to call his cell phone three or four times,
but he could not get through because the soccer field did not have a
signal. Extremely worried, Alex eventually called the police, convinced
that his wife and son had not arrived home because they had been in a
terrible car accident.

Alex suffers from **generalized anxiety disorder**\ {:
data-type=“term”}: a relatively continuous state of excessive,
uncontrollable, and pointless worry and apprehension. People with
generalized anxiety disorder often worry about routine, everyday things,
even though their concerns are unjustified
(`[link] <#Figure_15_04_Worry>`__). For example, an individual may worry
about her health and finances, the health of family members, the safety
of her children, or minor matters (e.g., being late for an appointment)
without having any legitimate reason for doing so (APA, 2013). A
diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder requires that the diffuse
worrying and apprehension characteristic of this disorder—what Sigmund
**Freud**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} referred to as
free-floating anxiety—is not part of another disorder, occurs more days
than not for at least six months, and is accompanied by any three of the
following symptoms: restlessness, difficulty concentrating, being easily
fatigued, muscle tension, irritability, and sleep difficulties.

|AA photograph shows a woman biting her fingernails.|\ {:
#Figure_15_04_Worry}

About 5.7% of the U.S. population will develop symptoms of generalized
anxiety disorder during their lifetime (Kessler et al., 2005), and
females are 2 times as likely as males to experience the disorder (APA,
2013). Generalized anxiety disorder is highly comorbid with mood
disorders and other anxiety disorders (Noyes, 2001), and it tends to be
chronic. Also, generalized anxiety disorder appears to increase the risk
for heart attacks and strokes, especially in people with preexisting
heart conditions (Martens et al., 2010).

Although there have been few investigations aimed at determining the
heritability of generalized anxiety disorder, a summary of available
family and twin studies suggests that genetic factors play a modest role
in the disorder (Hettema et al., 2001). Cognitive theories of
generalized anxiety disorder suggest that worry represents a mental
strategy to avoid more powerful negative emotions (Aikins & Craske,
2001), perhaps stemming from earlier unpleasant or traumatic
experiences. Indeed, one longitudinal study found that childhood
maltreatment was strongly related to the development of this disorder
during adulthood (Moffitt et al., 2007); worrying might distract people
from remembering painful childhood experiences.

Summary
=======

Anxiety disorders are a group of disorders in which a person experiences
excessive, persistent, and distressing fear and anxiety that interferes
with normal functioning. Anxiety disorders include specific phobia: a
specific unrealistic fear; social anxiety disorder: extreme fear and
avoidance of social situations; panic disorder: suddenly overwhelmed by
panic even though there is no apparent reason to be frightened;
agoraphobia: an intense fear and avoidance of situations in which it
might be difficult to escape; and generalized anxiety disorder: a
relatively continuous state of tension, apprehension, and dread.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      In which of the following anxiety disorders is the person in a
      continuous state of excessive, pointless worry and apprehension?

      1. panic disorder
      2. generalized anxiety disorder
      3. agoraphobia
      4. social anxiety disorder {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which of the following would constitute a safety behavior?

      1. encountering a phobic stimulus in the company of other people
      2. avoiding a field where snakes are likely to be present
      3. avoiding eye contact
      4. worrying as a distraction from painful memories {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

Critical Thinking Question
==========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Describe how cognitive theories of the etiology of anxiety
      disorders differ from learning theories.

   .. container::

      Learning theories suggest that some anxiety disorders, especially
      specific phobia, can develop through a number of learning
      mechanisms. These mechanisms can include classical and operant
      conditioning, modeling, or vicarious learning. Cognitive theories,
      in contrast, assume that some anxiety disorder, especially panic
      disorder, develop through cognitive misinterpretations of anxiety
      and other symptoms.

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   agoraphobia
      anxiety disorder characterized by intense fear, anxiety, and
      avoidance of situations in which it might be difficult to escape
      if one experiences symptoms of a panic attack ^
   anxiety disorder
      characterized by excessive and persistent fear and anxiety, and by
      related disturbances in behavior ^
   generalized anxiety disorder
      characterized by a continuous state of excessive, uncontrollable,
      and pointless worry and apprehension ^
   locus coeruleus
      area of the brainstem that contains norepinephrine, a
      neurotransmitter that triggers the body’s fight-or-flight
      response; has been implicated in panic disorder ^
   panic attack
      period of extreme fear or discomfort that develops abruptly;
      symptoms of panic attacks are both physiological and psychological
      ^
   panic disorder
      anxiety disorder characterized by unexpected panic attacks, along
      with at least one month of worry about panic attacks or
      self-defeating behavior related to the attacks ^
   safety behavior
      mental and behavior acts designed to reduce anxiety in social
      situations by reducing the chance of negative social outcomes;
      common in social anxiety disorder ^
   social anxiety disorder
      characterized by extreme and persistent fear or anxiety and
      avoidance of social situations in which one could potentially be
      evaluated negatively by others ^
   specific phobia
      anxiety disorder characterized by excessive, distressing, and
      persistent fear or anxiety about a specific object or situation

.. |A diagram shows an outline of a person’s upper body. Within this outline, some of the major organs appear. The brain is labeled, “Feeling dizzy, unsteady, lightheaded.” The heart is labeled, “Chest pain, palpitations and/or accelerated heart rate.” The lungs are labeled, “Shortness of breath.” The stomach is labeled, “Nausea or abdominal distress.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_15_04_Panic.jpg
.. |AA photograph shows a woman biting her fingernails.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_15_04_Worry.jpg
