============
Introduction
============



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

class=“introduction”

class=“summary” title=“Summary”

class=“review-questions” title=“Review Questions”

class=“critical-thinking” title=“Critical Thinking Questions”

class=“personal-application” title=“Personal Application Questions”

class=“references” title=“References”

|A photograph shows several key members of the United States military
accompanied by a crowd as they stand facing toward a wreath. All hold
their right arms in salute or placed across their chests.|\ {:
#Figure_15_00_NavyYard}

On Monday, September 16, 2013, a gunman killed 12 people as the workday
began at the Washington Navy Yard in Washington, DC. Aaron Alexis, 34,
had a troubled history: he thought that he was being controlled by radio
waves. He called the police to complain about voices in his head and
being under surveillance by “shadowy forces” (Thomas, Levine, Date, &
Cloherty, 2013). While Alexis’s actions cannot be excused, it is clear
that he had some form of mental illness. Mental illness is not
necessarily a cause of violence; it is far more likely that the mentally
ill will be victims rather than perpetrators of violence (Stuart, 2003).
If, however, Alexis had received the help he needed, this tragedy might
have been averted.

References
==========

Abela, J. R., & Hankin, B. L. (2011). Rumination as a vulnerability
factor to depression during the transition from early to middle
adolescence: A multiwave longitudinal study. *Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 120*, 259–271.

Abramowitz, J. S., & Siqueland, L. (2013). Obsessive-compulsive
disorder. In L. G. Castonguay & T. F. Oltmanns (Eds.), *Psychopathology:
From science to clinical practice* (pp. 143–171). New York, NY: Guilford
Press.

Abramson, L. Y., Metalsky, G. I., & Alloy, L. B. (1989). Hopelessness
depression: A theory- based subtype of depression. *Psychological
Review, 96*, 358–372.

Afifi, T. O., Mather, A., Boman, J., Fleisher, W., Enns, M. W.,
MacMillan, H., & Sareen, J. (2010). Childhood adversity and personality
disorder: Results from a nationally representative population-based
survey. *Journal of Psychiatric Research, 45*, 814–822.

Agerbo, E., Nordentoft, M., & Mortensen, P. B. (2002). Familial,
psychiatric, and socioeconomic risk factors for suicide in young people:
Nested case-control study. *British Medical Journal, 325*, 74–77.

Aghukwa, C. N. (2012). Care seeking and beliefs about the cause of
mental illness among Nigerian psychiatric patients and their families.
*Psychiatric Services, 63*, 616–618.

Aikins, D. E., & Craske, M. G. (2001). Cognitive theories of generalized
anxiety disorder. *Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 24*, 57–74.

Akinbami, L. J., Liu, X., Pastor, P., & Reuben, C. A. (2011, August).
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder among children aged 5–17 years
in the United States, 1998–2009 (NCHS data brief No. 70). Hyattsville,
MD: National Center for Health Statistics. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db70.pdf

Alden, L. E., & Bieling, P. (1998). Interpersonal consequences in the
pursuit of safety. *Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36*, 53–64.

Alegria, A. A., Blanco, C., Petry, N. M., Skodol, A. E., Liu, S. M., &
Grant, B. (2013). Sex differences in antisocial personality disorder:
Results from the National Epidemiological Survey on Alcohol and Related
Conditions. *Personality Disorders:* *Theory, Research, and Treatment,
4*, 214–222.

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). *Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders* (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.

Andreasen, N. C. (1987). The diagnosis of schizophrenia. *Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 13*, 9–22.

Andréasson, S., Allbeck, P., Engström, A., & Rydberg, U. (1987).
Cannabis and schizophrenia: A longitudinal study of Swedish conscripts.
*Lancet, 330*, 1483–1486.

Asberg, M., Thorén, P., Träskman, L., Bertilsson, L., & Ringberger, V.
(1976). “Serotonin depression”—a biochemical subgroup within the
affective disorders? *Science*, *191*\ (4226), 478–480.
doi:10.1126/science.1246632

Asperger’s syndrome dropped from psychiatrists’ handbook the DSM: DSM-5,
latest revision of Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, merges Asperger's
with autism and widens dyslexia category. (2012, December 1). *The
Guardian*. Retrieved from
http://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/dec/02/aspergers-syndrome-dropped-psychiatric-dsm

Autism Genome Project Consortium. (2007). Mapping autism risk loci using
genetic linkage and chromosomal rearrangements. *Nature Genetics, 39*,
319–328.

Baes, C. V. W., Tofoli, S. M. C., Martins, C. M. S., & Juruena, M. F.
(2012). Assessment of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis activity:
Glucocorticoid receptor and mineralocorticoid receptor function in
depression with early life stress—a systematic review. *Acta
Neuropsychiatrica, 24*, 4–15.

Baker, L. A., Bezdjian, S., & Raine, A. (2006). Behavioral genetics: The
science of antisocial behavior. *Law and Contemporary Problems, 69*,
7–46.

Barbaresi, W. J., Colligan, R. C., Weaver, A. L., Voigt, R. G., Killian,
J. M., & Katusic, S. K. (2013). Mortality, ADHD, and psychosocial
adversity in adults with childhood ADHD: A prospective study.
*Pediatrics, 131*, 637–644.

Barker, P. (2010). *The legacy of Thomas Szasz*. Retrieved from
http://www.centerforindependentthought.org/SzaszLegacy.html

Barkley, R. A. (2006). *Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A
handbook for diagnosis and treatment*. New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Barkley, R. A., Fischer, M., Smallish, L., & Fletcher, K. (2002). The
persistence of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder into young
adulthood as a function of reporting source and definition of disorder.
*Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111*, 279–289.

Battista, S. R., & Kocovski, N. L. (2010). Exploring the effect of
alcohol on post-event processing specific to a social event. *Cognitive
Behaviour Therapy, 39*, 1–10.

Baumeister, A. A., & Hawkins, M. F. (2004). The serotonin hypothesis of
schizophrenia: A historical case study on the heuristic value of theory
in clinical neuroscience. *Journal of the History of the Neurosciences,
13*, 277–291.

Beck, A. T. (1976). *Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders*. New
York, NY: International Universities Press.

Beck, A. T. (2008). The evolution of the cognitive model of depression
and its neurobiological correlates. *American Journal of Psychiatry,
165*, 969–977.

Berman, A. L. (2009). School-based suicide prevention: Research advances
and practice implications [Commentary]. *School Psychology Review, 38*,
233–238.

Bettelheim, B. (1967). *The empty fortress: Infantile autism and the
birth of the self*. New York, NY: Free Press.

Beucke, J. C., Sepulcre, J., Talukdar, T., Linnman, C., Zschenderlein,
K., Endrass, T., . . . Kathman, N. (2013). Abnormally high degree
connectivity of the orbitofrontal cortex in obsessive-compulsive
disorder. *JAMA Psychiatry, 70*, 619–629.

Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Hirshfeld-Becker, D. R., Friedman, D.,
Robin, J. A., & Rosenbaum, J. F. (2001). Patterns of psychopathology and
dysfunction in high-risk children of parents with panic disorder and
major depression. *American Journal of* *Psychiatry, 158*, 49–57.

Bolton, D., Rijsdijk, F., O’Connor, T. G., Perrin, S., & Eley, T. C.
(2007). Obsessive-compulsive disorder, tics and anxiety in 6-year-old
twins. *Psychological Medicine, 37*, 39–48.

Bourguignon, E. (1970). Hallucinations and trance: An anthropologist's
perspective. In W. Keup (Ed\ *.*), Origins and mechanisms of
hallucination (pp. 183–190). New York, NY: Plenum Press.

Bouton, M. E., Mineka, S., & Barlow, D. H. (2001). A modern learning
theory perspective on the etiology of panic disorder. *Psychological
Review, 108*, 4–32.

Bramsen, I., Dirkzwager, A. J. E., & van der Ploeg, H. M. (2000).
Predeployment personality traits and exposure to trauma as predictors of
posttraumatic stress symptoms: A prospective study of former
peacekeepers. *American Journal of Psychiatry, 157*, 1115–1119.

Bregman, J. D. (2005). Definitions and characteristics of the spectrum.
In D. Zager (Ed.), *Autism spectrum disorders: Identification,
education, and treatment* (3rd ed., pp. 3–46). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Brewin, C. R., Andrews, B., & Valentine, J. D. (2000). Meta-analysis of
risk factors for posttraumatic stress disorder in trauma-exposed adults.
*Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68*, 748–756.

Bremner, J. D., Krystal, J. H., Southwick, S. M., & Charney, D. S.
(1996). Noradrenergic mechanisms in stress and anxiety: I. preclinical
studies. *Synapse, 23*, 28–38.

Brown, A. S., Begg, M. D., Gravenstein, S., Schaefer, C. A., Wyatt, R.
J., Breshnahan, M., . . . Susser, E. S. (2004). Serologic evidence of
prenatal influenza in the etiology of schizophrenia. *Archives of
General Psychiatry, 61*, 774–780.

Boland, R. J., & Keller, M. B. (2009). Course and outcome of depression.
In I. H. Gotlib & C. L. Hammen (Eds.), *Handbook of depression*
(pp. 23–43). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Brent, D. A., & Bridge, J. (2003). Firearms availability and suicide: A
review of the literature. *American Behavioral Scientist, 46*,
1192–1210.

Brown, G. W., & Harris, T. O. (1989). Depression. In G. W. Brown and T.
O. Harris (Eds.), *Life events and illness* (pp. 49–93). New York, NY:
Guilford Press.

Brown, G. W., Ban, M., Craig, T. J. K., Harris, T. O., Herbert, J., &
Uher, R. (2013). Serotonin transporter length polymorphism, childhood
maltreatment, and chronic depression: A specific gene-environment
interaction. *Depression and Anxiety, 30*, 5–13.

Buchanan-Barker, P., Barker, P. (2009, February). The convenient myth of
Thomas Szasz. *Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing,*
*16*\ (1): 87–95. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2850.2008.01310.x

Buchsbaum, M. S., Nuechterlein, K. H., Haier, R. J., Wu, J., Sicotte,
N., Hazlett, E., . . . Guich, S. (1990). Glucose metabolic rate in
normal and schizophrenics during the continuous performance test
assessed by positron emission tomography. *British* *Journal of
Psychiatry, 156*, 216–227.

Burt, S. A. (2009). Rethinking environmental contributions to child and
adolescent psychopathology: A meta-analysis of shared environmental
influences. *Psychological* *Bulletin, 135*, 608–637.

Butler, L. D., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1994). Gender differences in
responses to depressed mood in a college sample. *Sex Roles, 30*,
331–346.

Byrd, R. (2002, October 17). Report to the legislature on the principal
findings from the epidemiology of autism in California: A comprehensive
pilot study. Retrieved from http://www.dds.ca.gov/Autism/MindReport.cfm

Cadoret, R., Yates, W., Ed., T., Woodworth, G., & Stewart, M. (1995).
Genetic environmental interactions in the genesis of aggressivity and
conduct disorders. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 52*, 916–924.

Cannon, M., Jones, P. B., & Murray, R. M. (2002). Obstetric
complications and schizophrenia: Historical and meta-analytic review.
*American Journal of Psychiatry*, *159*, 1080–1092.

Casadio, P., Fernandes, C., Murray, R. M., & Di Forti, M. (2011).
Cannabis use in young people: The risk for schizophrenia. *Neuroscience
and Biobehavioral Reviews, 35*, 1779–1787.

Cardeña, E., & Gleaves, D. H. (2006). Dissociative disorders. In M.
Hersen, S. M. Turner, & D. C. Beidel (Eds.), *Adult psychopathology and
diagnosis* (pp. 473–503). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.

Caspi, A., Sugden, K., Moffitt, T. E., Taylor, A., Craig, I. W.,
Harrington, H., Poulton, R. (2003). Influence of life stress on
depression: Moderation by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene. *Science,
301*\ (5631), 386–389.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2010, November 12).
Increasing prevalence of parent-reported attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder among children, United States, 2003–2007. *Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report, 59*\ (44), 1439–1443.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2012). Suicide: Facts at a
glance. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/ViolencePrevention/pdf/Suicide\_DataSheet-a.pdf

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2012, March 30). Prevalence
of autism spectrum disorders—autism and developmental disabilities
monitoring network, 14 sites, United States, 2008. *Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report: Surveillance Summaries, 61*\ (3), 1–19.
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/ss/ss6103.pdf

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013a). *Definitions:
Self-directed violence*. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/suicide/definitions.html.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013b). *National suicide
statistics at a glance: Trends in suicide rates among both sexes, by age
group, United States, 1991–2009*. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/suicide/statistics/trends02.html

Charney, D. S., Woods, S. W., Nagy, L. M., Southwick, S. M., Krystal, J.
H., & Heninger, G. R. (1990). Noradrenergic function in panic disorder
[Supplemental material]. *Journal of Clinical* *Psychiatry, 51*, 5–11.

Clark, D. M. (1996). Panic disorder: From theory to therapy. In R. M.
Rapee (Ed.), *Current controversies in the anxiety disorders*
(pp. 318–344). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Clauss, J. A., & Blackford, J. U. (2012). Behavioral inhibition and risk
for developing social anxiety disorder: A meta-analytic study. *Journal
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 51*\ (10),
1066–1075.

Clegg, J. W. (2012). Teaching about mental health and illness through
the history of the DSM. *History of Psychology, 15*, 364–370.

Compton, W. M., Conway, K. P., Stinson, F. S., Colliver, J. D., & Grant,
B. F. (2005). Prevalence, correlates, and comorbidity of DSM-IV
antisocial personality syndromes and alcohol and specific drug use
disorders in the United States: Results from the national epidemiologic
survey on alcohol and related conditions\ *. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 66*, 677–685.

Cook, M., & Mineka, S. (1989). Observational conditioning of fear to
fear-relevant versus fear-irrelevant stimuli in rhesus monkeys. *Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 98*, 448–459.

Craske, M. G. (1999). *Anxiety disorders: Psychological approaches to
theory and* *treatment*. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Crosby, A. E., Ortega, L., & Melanson, C. (2011). *Self-directed
violence surveillance: Uniform definitions and recommended data
elements*, *version 1.0*. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/self-directed-violence-a.pdf

Dalenberg, C. J., Brand, B. L., Gleaves, D. H., Dorahy, M. J.,
Loewenstein, R. J., Cardeña, E., . . . Spiegel, D. (2012). Evaluation of
the evidence for the trauma and fantasy models of dissociation.
*Psychological Bulletin, 138*, 550–588.

Sometimes Interesting: Weird, Forgotten, and Sometimes Interesting
Things. (2011, July 2). Dancing mania [Web log post]. Retrieved from
http://sometimes-interesting.com/2011/07/02/dancing-mania/

Davidson, R. J., Pizzagalli, D. A., & Nitschke, J. B. (2009).
Representation and regulation of emotional depression: Perspectives from
cognitive neuroscience. In I. H. Gotlib & C. L. Hammen (Eds.), *Handbook
of depression* (pp. 218–248). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Davis, K. L., Kahn, R. S., Ko., G., & Davidson, M. (1991). Dopamine in
schizophrenia: A review and reconceptualization. *American Journal of
Psychiatry, 148*, 1474–1486.

Decety, J., Skelly, L. R., & Kiehl, K. A. (2013). Brain response to
empathy-eliciting scenarios involving pain in incarcerated individuals
with psychopathy. *JAMA Psychiatry, 70*, 638–645.

Demos, J. (1983). *Entertaining Satan: Witchcraft and the culture of
early New England*. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Dempsey, A. F., Schaffer, S., Singer, D., Butchart, A., Davis, M., &
Freed, G. L. (2011). Alternative vaccination schedule preferences among
parents of young children. *Pediatrics, 128*, 848–856.

DeStefano, F., Price, C. S., & Weintraub, E. S. (2013). Increasing
exposures to antibody-stimulating proteins and polysaccharides in
vaccines is not associated with risk of autism. *The Journal of
Pediatrics, 163*, 561–567.

DiGrande, L., Perrin, M. A., Thorpe, L. E., Thalji, L., Murphy, J., Wu,
D., . . . Brackbill, R. M. (2008). Posttraumatic stress symptoms, PTSD,
and risk factors among lower Manhattan residents 2–3 years after the
September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks. *Journal of Traumatic Stress, 21*,
264–273.

DNA project aims to count Scots redheads. (2012, November 7). *British
Broadcast Corporation [BBC]*. Retrieved from
http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-scotland-20237511

Downs, M. (2008, March 31). Autism-vaccine link: Evidence doesn’t dispel
doubts [Web log post]. Retrieved from
www.webmd.com/brain/autism/searching-for-answers/vaccines-autism

Dozois, D. J. A., & Beck, A. T. (2008). Cognitive schemas, beliefs and
assumptions. In K. S. Dobson & D. J. A. Dozois (Eds.), *Risk factors in
depression* (pp. 121–143). New York, NY: Academic Press.

Drevets, W. C., Bogers, W. U., & Raichle, M. E. (2002). Functional
anatomical correlates of antidepressant drug treatment assessed using
PET measures of regional glucose metabolism. *European
Neuropsychopharmacology, 12*, 527–544.

Ehlers, A., & Clark, D. M. (2000). A cognitive model of posttraumatic
stress disorder. *Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38*, 319–345.

Etzersdorfer, E., Voracek, M., & Sonneck, G. (2004). A dose-response
relationship between imitational suicides and newspaper distribution.
*Archives of Suicide Research, 8*, 137– 145.

Fabrega, H. (2007). How psychiatric conditions were made. *Psychiatry,
70*, 130–153.

Fitzgerald, P. B., Laird, A. R., Maller, J., & Daskalakis, Z. J. (2008).
A meta-analytic study of changes in brain activation in depression.
*Human Brain Mapping, 29*, 683–695.

Fields, T. (2010). Postpartum depression effects on early interactions,
parenting, and safety practices: A review. *Infant Behavior and
Development, 33*, 1–6.

Fisher, C. (2010, February 11). DSM-5 development process included
emphasis on gender and cultural sensitivity [Web log post]. Retrieved
from http://www.bmedreport.com/archives/9359

Fleischman, A., Bertolote, J. M., Belfer, M., & Beautrais, A. (2005).
Completed suicide and psychiatric diagnoses in young people: A critical
examination of the evidence. *American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 75*,
676–683.

Foote, B., Smolin, Y., Kaplan, M., Legatt, M. E., & Lipschitz, D.
(2006). Prevalence of dissociative disorders in psychiatric outpatients.
*American Journal of Psychiatry, 163*, 623–629.

Fox, N. A., Henderson, H. A., Marshall, P. J., Nichols, K. E., & Ghera,
M. M. (2005). Behavioral inhibition: Linking biology and behavior within
a developmental framework. *Annual Review of Psychology, 56*, 235–262.

Frances, A. (2012, December 2). DSM 5 is guide not bible—ignore its ten
worst changes [Web log post]. Retrieved from
http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/dsm5-in-distress/201212/dsm-5-is-guide-not-bible-ignore-its-ten-worst-changes

Freeman, A., Stone, M., Martin, D., & Reinecke, M. (2005). A review of
borderline personality disorder. In A. Freeman, M. Stone, D. Martin, &
M. Reinecke (Eds.), *Comparative treatments for borderline personality
disorder* (pp. 1–20). New York, NY: Springer.

Fung, M. T., Raine, A., Loeber, R., Lynam, D. R., Steinhauer, S. R.,
Venables, P. H., & Stouthamer-Loeber, M. (2005). Reduced electrodermal
activity in psychopathy-prone adolescents. *Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 114*, 187–196.

Fusar-Poli, P., Borgwardt, S., Bechdolf, A., Addington, J.,
Riecher-Rössler, A., Schultze-Lutter, F., . . . Yung, A. (2013). The
psychosis high-risk state: A comprehensive state-of-the-art review.
*Archives of General Psychiatry, 70*, 107–120.

Gauthier, J., Siddiqui, T. J., Huashan, P., Yokomaku, D., Hamdan, F. F.,
Champagne, N., . . . Rouleau, G.A. (2011). Truncating mutations in NRXN2
and NRXN1 in autism spectrum disorders and schizophrenia. *Human
Genetics, 130*, 563–573.

Gizer, I. R., Ficks, C., & Waldman, I. D. (2009). Candidate gene studies
of ADHD: A meta-analytic review. *Human Genetics, 126*, 51–90.

Goldstein, A. J., & Chambless, D. L. (1978). A reanalysis of
agoraphobia. *Behavior Therapy, 9*, 47–59.

Goldstein, J. M., Buka, S. L., Seidman, L. J., & Tsuang, M. T. (2010).
Specificity of familial transmission of schizophrenia psychosis spectrum
and affective psychoses in the New England family study’s high-risk
design. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 67*, 458–467.

Good, B. J., & Hinton, D. E. (2009). Panic disorder in cross-cultural
and historical perspective. In D. E. Hinton & B. J. Good (Eds.),
*Culture and panic disorder* (pp. 1–28). Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.

Goodman, S. H., & Brand, S. R. (2009). Depression and early adverse
experiences. In I. H. Gotlib & C. L. Hammen (Eds.), *Handbook of
depression* (pp. 249–274). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Gotlib, I. H., & Joormann, J. (2010). Cognition and depression: Current
status and future directions. *Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 6*,
285–312.

Gottesman, I. I. (2001). Psychopathology through a life span-genetic
prism. *American Psychologist, 56*, 867–878.

Graybiel, A. N., & Rauch, S. L. (2000). Toward a neurobiology of
obsessive-compulsive disorder. *Neuron, 28*, 343–347.

Green, M. F. (2001). *Schizophrenia revealed: From neurons to social
interactions*. New York, NY: W. W. Norton.

Hackmann, A., Clark, D. M., & McManus, F. (2000). Recurrent images and
early memories in social phobia. *Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38*,
601–610.

Halligan, S. L., Herbert, J., Goodyer, I., & Murray, L. (2007).
Disturbances in morning cortisol secretion in association with maternal
postnatal depression predict subsequent depressive symptomatology in
adolescents. *Biological Psychiatry, 62*, 40–46.

Hare, R. D. (1965). Temporal gradient of fear arousal in psychopaths.
*Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 70*, 442–445.

Hasin, D. S., Fenton, M. C., & Weissman, M. M. (2011). Epidemiology of
depressive disorders. In M. T. Tsuang, M. Tohen, & P. Jones (Eds.),
*Textbook of psychiatric epidemiology* (pp. 289–309). Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons.

Herman, J. (1997). *Trauma and recovery: The aftermath of violence—from
domestic abuse to political terror*. New York, NY: Basic Books.

Herrenkohl, T. I., Maguin, E., Hill, K. G., Hawkins, J. D., Abbott, R.
D., & Catalano, R. (2000). Developmental risk factors for youth
violence. *Journal of Adolescent Health, 26*, 176–186.

Heston, L. L. (1966). Psychiatric disorders in foster home reared
children of schizophrenic mothers. *British Journal of Psychiatry, 112*,
819–825.

Hettema, J. M., Neale, M. C., & Kendler, K. S. (2001). A review and
meta-analysis of the genetic epidemiology of anxiety disorders. *The
American Journal of Psychiatry, 158*, 1568–1578.

Holsboer, F., & Ising, M. (2010). Stress hormone regulation: Biological
role and translation into therapy. *Annual Review of Psychology, 61*,
81–109.

Howes, O. D., & Kapur, S. (2009). The dopamine hypothesis of
schizophrenia: Version III—The final common pathway. *Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 35*, 549–562.

Hoza, B., Mrug, S., Gerdes, A. C., Hinshaw, S. P., Bukowski, W. M.,
Gold, J. A., . . . Arnold, L. E. (2005). What aspects of peer
relationships are impaired in children with ADHD? Journal *of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 73*, 411–423.

Hughes, V. (2007). Mercury rising. *Nature Medicine, 13*, 896–897.

Jellinek, M. S., & Herzog, D. B. (1999). The child. In A. M. Nicholi,
Jr. (Ed.), *The* *Harvard guide to psychiatry* (pp. 585–610). Cambridge,
MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University.

Johnson, J. G., Cohen, P., Kasen, S., & Brook, J. S. (2006).
Dissociative disorders among adults in the community, impaired
functioning, and axis I and II comorbidity. *Journal of Psychiatric
Research*, *40*, 131–140.

Joormann, J. (2009). Cognitive aspects of depression. In I. H. Gotlib &
C. L. Hammen (Eds.), *Handbook of depression* (pp. 298–321). New York,
NY: Guilford Press.

Joyce, P. R., McKenzie, J. M., Luty, S. E., Mulder, R. T., Carter, J.
D., Sullivan, P. F., & Cloninger, C. R. (2003). Temperament, childhood
environment, and psychopathology as risk factors for avoidant and
borderline personality disorders. *Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry, 37*, 756–764.

Judd, L. L. (2012). Dimensional paradigm of the long-term course of
unipolar major depressive disorder. *Depression and Anxiety, 29*,
167–171.

Kagan, J., Reznick, J. S., & Snidman, N. (1988). Biological bases of
childhood shyness. *Science, 240*, 167–171.

Katzelnick, D. J., Kobak, K. A., DeLeire, T., Henk, H. J., Greist, J.
H., Davidson, J. R. T., . . . Helstad, C. P. (2001). Impact of
generalized social anxiety disorder in managed care. *The American
Journal of Psychiatry, 158*, 1999–2007.

Kendler, K. S., Hettema, J. M., Butera, F., Gardner, C. O., & Prescott,
C. A. (2003). Life event dimensions of loss, humiliation, entrapment,
and danger in the prediction of onsets of major depression and
generalized anxiety. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 60*, 789–796.

Kennedy, A., LaVail, K., Nowak, G., Basket, M., & Landry, S. (2011).
Confidence about vaccines in the United States: Understanding parents’
perceptions. *Health Affairs, 30*, 1151–1159.

Kessler, R. C. (1997). The effects of stressful life events on
depression. *Annual Review of Psychology, 48*, 191–214.

Kessler, R. C. (2003). Epidemiology of women and depression. *Journal of
Affective Disorders, 74*, 5–13.

Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. P., &
Walters, E. F. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset
distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 62*, 593–602.

Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Jin, R., Ruscio, A. M., Shear, K., &
Walters, E. (2006). The epidemiology of panic attacks, panic disorder,
and agoraphobia in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.
*Archives of General Psychiatry, 63*, 415–424.

Kessler, R. C., Galea, S., Gruber, M. J., Sampson, N. A., Ursano, R. J.,
& Wessely, S. (2008). Trends in mental illness and suicidality after
Hurricane Katrina. *Molecular* *Psychiatry, 13*, 374–384.

Kessler, R. C., Ruscio, A. M., Shear, K., & Wittchen, H. U. (2009).
Epidemiology of anxiety disorders. In M. B. Stein & T. Steckler (Eds.),
*Behavioral neurobiology of anxiety and its treatment* (pp. 21–35). New
York, NY: Springer.

Kessler, R. C. Sonnega, A., Bromet, E., Hughes, M., & Nelson, C. B.
(1995). Posttraumatic stress disorder in the National Comorbidity
Survey. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 52*, 1048–1060.

Kessler, R. C., & Wang, P. S. (2009). Epidemiology of depression. In I.
H. Gotlib & C. L. Hammen (Eds.), *Handbook of depression* (pp. 5–22).
New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Khashan, A. S., Abel, K. M., McNamee, R., Pedersen, M. G., Webb, R.,
Baker, P., . . . Mortensen, P. B. (2008). Higher risk of offspring
schizophrenia following antenatal maternal exposure to severe adverse
life events. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 65*, 146–152.

Kinney, D. K., Barch, D. H., Chayka, B., Napoleon, S., & Munir, K. M.
(2009). Environmental risk factors for autism: Do they help or cause de
novo genetic mutations that contribute to the disorder? *Medical
Hypotheses, 74*, 102–106.

Kleim, B., Gonzalo, D., & Ehlers, A. (2011). The Depressive Attributions
Questionnaire (DAQ): Development of a short self-report measure of
depressogenic attributions. *Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral
Assessment, 33*, 375–385.

Klein, R. G., Mannuzza, S., Olazagasti, M. A. R., Roizen, E., Hutchison,
J. A., Lashua, E. C., & Castellanos, F. X. (2012). Clinical and
functional outcome of childhood attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
33 years later. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 69*, 1295–1303.

Koenen, K. C., Stellman, J. M., Stellman, S. D., & Sommer, J. F. (2003).
Risk factors for course of posttraumatic stress disorder among Vietnam
veterans: A 14-year follow-up of American Legionnaires. *Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71*, 980–986.

Kopell, B. H., & Greenberg, B. D. (2008). Anatomy and physiology of the
basal ganglia: Implications for DBS in psychiatry. *Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews, 32*, 408–422.

Large, M., Sharma, S., Compton, M. T., Slade, T., & Nielssen, O. (2011).
Cannabis use and earlier onset of psychosis: A systematic meta-analysis.
*Archives of General* *Psychiatry, 68*, 555–561.

Lasalvia, A., Zoppei, S., Van Bortel, T., Bonetto, C., Cristofalo, D.,
Wahlbeck, K., Thornicroft, G. (2013). Global pattern of experienced and
anticipated discrimination reported by people with major depressive
disorder: A cross-sectional survey. *The Lancet, 381*, 55–62.

Lawrie, S. M., & Abukmeil, S. S. (1998). Brain abnormality in
schizophrenia: A systematic and quantitative review of volumetric
magnetic resonance imaging studies. *British Journal of Psychiatry,
172*, 110–120.

LeMoult, J., Castonguay, L. G., Joormann, J., & McAleavey, A. (2013).
Depression. In L. G. Castonguay & T. F. Oltmanns (Eds\ *.),
Psychopathology: From science to clinical practice* (pp. 17–61). New
York, NY: Guilford Press.

Lezenweger, M. F., Lane, M. C., Loranger, A. W., & Kessler, R. C.
(2007). DSM-IV personality disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication. *Biological Psychiatry, 62*, 553–564.

Lilienfeld, S. O., & Marino, L. (1999). Essentialism revisited:
Evolutionary theory and the concept of mental disorder. *Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 108*, 400–411.

Linnet, K. M., Dalsgaard, S., Obel, C., Wisborg, K., Henriksen, T. B.,
Rodriquez, A., . . . Jarvelin, M. R. (2003). Maternal lifestyle factors
in pregnancy risk of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and
associated behaviors: A review of current evidence. *The* *American
Journal of Psychiatry, 160*, 1028–1040.

Livesley, J. (2008). Toward a genetically-informed model of borderline
personality disorder. *Journal of Personality Disorders, 22*, 42–71.

Livesley, J., & Jang, K. L. (2008). The behavioral genetics of
personality disorders. *Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 4*,
247–274.

Loe, I. M., & Feldman, H. M. (2007). Academic and educational outcomes
of children with ADHD. *Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 32*, 643–654.

Luxton, D. D., June, J. D., & Fairall, J. M. (2012, May). Social media
and suicide: A public health perspective [Supplement 2]. *American
Journal of Public Health, 102*\ (S2), S195–S200.
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2011.300608

Mackin, P., & Young, A. H. (2004, May 1). The role of cortisol and
depression: Exploring new opportunities for treatments. *Psychiatric
Times*. Retrieved from
http://www.psychiatrictimes.com/articles/role-cortisol-and-depression-exploring-new-opportunities-treatments

Maher, W. B., & Maher, B. A. (1985). Psychopathology: I. from ancient
times to the eighteenth century. In G. A. Kimble & K. Schlesinger
(Eds.), *Topics in the history of psychology: Volume 2* (pp. 251–294).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Mann, J. J., (2003). Neurobiology of suicidal behavior. *Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 4*, 819–828.

Marker, C. D. (2013, March 3). Safety behaviors in social anxiety:
Playing it safe in social anxiety [Web log post]. Retrieved from
http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/face-your-fear/201303/safety-behaviors-in-social-anxiety

Martens, E. J., de Jonge, P., Na, B., Cohen, B. E., Lett, H., & Whooley,
M. A. (2010). Scared to death? Generalized anxiety disorder and
cardiovascular events in patients with stable coronary heart disease.
*Archives of General Psychiatry, 67*, 750–758.

Mataix-Cols, D., Frost, R. O., Pertusa, A., Clark, L. A., Saxena, S.,
Leckman, J. F., . . . Wilhelm, S. (2010). Hoarding disorder: A new
diagnosis for DSM-V? *Depression and Anxiety, 27*, 556–572.

Mayes, R., & Horowitz, A. V. (2005). DSM-III and the revolution in the
classification of mental illness. *Journal of the History of the
Behavioral Sciences, 41*, 249–267.

Mazure, C. M. (1998). Life stressors as risk factors in depression.
*Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 5*, 291–313.

Marshal, M. P., & Molina, B. S. G. (2006). Antisocial behaviors moderate
the deviant peer pathway to substance use in children with ADHD.
*Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 35*, 216–226.

McCabe, K. (2010, January 24). Teen’s suicide prompts a look at
bullying. *Boston Globe*. Retrieved from http://www.boston.com

McCabe, R. E., Antony, M. M., Summerfeldt, L. J., Liss, A., & Swinson,
R. P. (2003). Preliminary examination of the relationship between
anxiety disorders in adults and self-reported history of teasing or
bullying experiences. *Cognitive Behaviour Therapy*, *32*, 187–193.

McCann, D., Barrett, A., Cooper, A., Crumpler, D., Dalen, L., Grimshaw,
K., . . . Stevenson, J. (2007). Food additives and hyperactive behaviour
in 3-year-old and 8/9-year-old children in the community: A randomised,
double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial. *The Lancet, 370*\ (9598),
1560–1567.

McEwen, B. S. (2005). Glucocorticoids, depression, and mood disorders:
Structural remodeling in the brain. *Metabolism: Clinical and
Experimental, 54*, 20–23.

McNally, R. J. (2003). *Remembering trauma*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Meek, S. E., Lemery-Chalfant, K., Jahromi, L. D., & Valiente, C. (2013).
A review of gene-environment correlations and their implications for
autism: A conceptual model. *Psychological Review, 120*, 497–521.

Merikangas, K. R., & Tohen, M. (2011). Epidemiology of bipolar disorder
in adults and children. In M. T. Tsuang, M. Tohen, & P. Jones (Eds.),
*Textbook of psychiatric epidemiology* (pp. 329–342). Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons.

Merikangas, K. R., Jin, R., He, J. P., Kessler, R. C., Lee, S., Sampson,
N. A., Zarkov, Z. (2011). Prevalence and correlates of bipolar spectrum
disorder in the World Mental Health Survey Initiative. *Archives of
General Psychiatry, 68*, 241–251.

Mezzich, J. E. (2002). International surveys on the use of ICD-10 and
related diagnostic systems. *Psychopathology, 35*, 72–75.

Michaud, K., Matheson, K., Kelly, O., & Anisman, H. (2008). Impact of
stressors in a natural context on release of cortisol in healthy adult
humans: A meta-analysis. *Stress, 11*, 177–197.

Mineka, S., & Cook, M. (1993). Mechanisms involved in the observational
conditioning of fear. *Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
122*, 23–38.

Moffitt, T. E., Caspi, A., Harrington, H., Milne, B. J., Melchior, M.,
Goldberg, D., & Poulton, R. (2007). Generalized anxiety disorder and
depression: Childhood risk factors in a birth cohort followed to age 32.
*Psychological Medicine, 37*, 441–452.

Moitra, E., Beard, C., Weisberg, R. B., & Keller, M. B. (2011).
Occupational impairment and social anxiety disorder in a sample of
primary care patients. *Journal of Affective* *Disorders, 130*, 209–212.

Molina, B. S. G., & Pelham, W. E. (2003). Childhood predictors of
adolescent substance abuse in a longitudinal study of children with
ADHD. *Journal of Abnormal* *Psychology, 112*, 497–507.

Moore, T. H., Zammit, S., Lingford-Hughes, A., Barnes, T. R., Jones, P.
B., Burke, M., & Lewis, G. (2007). Cannabis use and risk of psychotic or
affective mental health outcomes. *Lancet*, *370*, 319–328.

Morris, E. P., Stewart, S. H., & Ham, L. S. (2005). The relationship
between social anxiety disorder and alcohol use disorders: A critical
review. *Clinical Psychology Review, 25*, 734–760.

Mowrer, O. H. (1960). *Learning theory and behavior*. New York, NY: John
Wiley & Sons.

Nader, K. (2001). Treatment methods for childhood trauma. In J. P.
Wilson, M. J. Friedman, & J. D. Lindy (Eds.), *Treating psychological
trauma and PTSD* (pp. 278–334). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Nanni, V., Uher, R., & Danese, A. (2012). Childhood maltreatment
predicts unfavorable course of illness and treatment outcome in
depression: A meta-analysis. *American Journal of Psychiatry, 169*,
141–151.

Nathan, D. (2011). *Sybil exposed: The extraordinary story behind the
famous multiple personality case*. New York, NY: Free Press.

National Comorbidity Survey. (2007). *NCS-R lifetime prevalence
estimates* [Data file]. Retrieved from
http://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/ncs/index.php

National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). (2007, October). *Comorbid drug
use and mental illness: A research update from the National Institute on
Drug Abuse*. Retrieved from
http://www.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/comorbid.pdf

Nestadt, G., Samuels, J., Riddle, M., Bienvenu, J., Liang, K. Y.,
LaBuda, M., . . . Hoehn-Saric, R. (2000). A family study of
obsessive-compulsive disorder. *Archives of* *General Psychiatry, 57*,
358–363.

Newman, C. F. (2004). Suicidality. In S. L. Johnson & R. L. Leahy
(Eds.), *Psychological treatment of bipolar disorder* (pp. 265–285). New
York, NY: Guilford Press.

Nikolas, M. A., & Burt, S. A. (2010). Genetic and environmental
influences on ADHD symptom dimensions of inattention and hyperactivity:
A meta-analysis. *Journal of* *Abnormal Psychology, 119*, 1–17.

Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1987). Sex differences in unipolar depression:
Evidence and theory. *Psychological* *Bulletin, 101*, 259–282.

Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1991). Responses to depression and their effects on
the duration of depressive episodes. *Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
100*, 569–582.

Nolen-Hoeksema, S. & Hilt, L. M. (2009). Gender differences in
depression. In I. H. Gotlib & C. L. Hammen (Eds.), *Handbook of
depression* (pp. 386–404). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Larson, J., & Grayson, C. (1999). Explaining the
gender difference in depressive symptoms. *Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 77*, 1061–1072.

Norberg, M. M., Calamari, J. E., Cohen, R. J., & Riemann, B. C. (2008).
Quality of life in obsessive-compulsive disorder: An evaluation of
impairment and a preliminary analysis of the ameliorating effects of
treatment. *Depression and Anxiety, 25*, 248–259.

Novella, S. (2008, April 16). The increase in autism diagnoses: Two
hypotheses [Web log post]. Retrieved from
http://www.sciencebasedmedicine.org/the-increase-in-autism-diagnoses-two-hypotheses/

Novick, D. M., Swartz, H. A., & Frank, E. (2010). Suicide attempts in
bipolar I and bipolar II disorder: A review and meta-analysis of the
evidence. *Bipolar Disorders, 12*, 1–9.

Noyes, R. (2001). Comorbidity in generalized anxiety disorder.
*Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 24*, 41–55.

O’Connor, R. C., Smyth, R., Ferguson, E., Ryan, C., & Williams, J. M. G.
(2013). Psychological processes and repeat suicidal behavior: A
four-year prospective study. *Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology*. Advance online publication. doi:10.1037/a0033751

Öhman, A., & Mineka, S. (2001). Fears, phobias, and preparedness: Toward
an evolved module of fear and fear learning. *Psychological Review,
108*, 483–552.

Oliver, J. (2006, Summer). The myth of Thomas Szasz. *The New Atlantis*,
*13*. Retrieved from
http://www.thenewatlantis.com/docLib/TNA13-Oliver.pdf

Olsson, A., & Phelps, E. A. (2007). Social learning of fear. *Nature
Neuroscience, 10*, 1095–1102.

Oltmanns, T. F., & Castonguay, L. G. (2013). General issues in
understanding and treating psychopathology. In L. G. Castonguay & T. F.
Oltmanns (Eds.), *Psychopathology: From science to clinical practice*
(pp. 1–16). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Orr, S. P., Metzger, L. J., Lasko, N. B., Macklin, M. L., Peri, T., &
Pitman, R. K. (2000). De novo conditioning in trauma-exposed individuals
with and without posttraumatic stress disorder\ *. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 109*, 290–298.

Owens, D., Horrocks, J., & House, A. (2002). Fatal and non-fatal
repetition of self-harm: Systematic review. *British Journal of
Psychiatry, 181*, 193–199.

Ozer, E. J., Best, S. R., Lipsey, T. L., & Weiss, D. S. (2003).
Predictors of posttraumatic stress disorder and symptoms in adults: A
meta-analysis. *Psychological Bulletin, 129*, 52–73.

Parker-Pope, T. (2013, May 2). Suicide rates rise sharply in U.S. *The
New York Times*. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com.

Patrick, C. J., Fowles, D. C., & Krueger, R. F. (2009). Triarchic
conceptualization of psychopathy: Developmental origins of
disinhibition, boldness, and meanness. *Development and Psychopathology,
21*, 913–938.

Patterson, M. L., Iizuka, Y., Tubbs, M. E., Ansel, J., Tsutsumi, M., &
Anson, J. (2007). Passing encounters east and west: Comparing Japanese
and American pedestrian interactions. *Journal of* *Nonverbal Behavior,
31*, 155–166.

Pauls, D. L. (2010). The genetics of obsessive-compulsive disorder: A
review. *Dialogues* *in Clinical Neuroscience, 12*, 149–163.

Paykel, E. S. (2003). Life events and affective disorders [Supplemental
material]. *Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 108*\ (S418), 61–66.

Pazain, M. (2010, December 2). To look or not to look? Eye contact
differences in different cultures [Web log post]. Retrieved from
http://www.examiner.com/article/to-look-or-not-to-look-eye-contact-differences-different-cultures

Phan, K. L., Fitzgerald, D. A., Nathan, P. J., Moore, G. J., Uhde, T.
W., & Tancer, M. E. (2005). Neural substrates for voluntary suppression
of negative affect: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
*Biological Psychiatry, 57*, 210–219.

Phillips, D. P. (1974). The influence of suggestion on suicide:
Substantive and theoretical implications of the Werther Effect.
*American Sociological Review, 39*, 340–354.

Phillips, K. (2005). *The broken mirror:* *Understanding and treating
body dysmorphic disorder*. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.

Piper, A., & Merskey, H. (2004). The persistence of folly: A critical
examination of dissociative identity disorder: Part I: The excesses of
an improbable concept. *Canadian Journal of Psychiatry*, 49, 592–600.

Pittman, R. K. (1988). Post-traumatic stress disorder, conditioning, and
network theory. *Psychiatric Annals, 18*, 182–189.

Pompili, M., Serafini, G., Innamorati, M., Möller-Leimkühler, A. M.,
Guipponi, G., Girardi, P., Tatarelli, R., & Lester, D. (2010). The
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and serotonin abnormalities: A
selective overview of the implications of suicide prevention. *European
Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 260*, 583–600.

Pope, H. G., Jr., Barry, S. B., Bodkin, A., & Hudson, J. I. (2006).
Tracking scientific interest in the dissociative disorders: A study of
scientific publication output 1984–2003. *Psychotherapy and
Psychosomatics, 75*, 19–24.

Pope, H. G., Jr., Hudson, J. I., Bodkin, J. A., & Oliva, P. S. (1998).
Questionable validity of ‘dissociative amnesia’ in trauma victims:
Evidence from prospective studies. *British Journal of Psychiatry, 172*,
210–215.

Pope, H. G., Jr., Poliakoff, M. B., Parker, M. P., Boynes, M., & Hudson,
J. I. (2006). Is dissociative amnesia a culture-bound syndrome? Findings
from a survey of historical literature. *Psychological Medicine, 37*,
225–233.

Postolache, T. T., Mortensen, P. B., Tonelli, L. H., Jiao, X.,
Frangakis, C., Soriano, J. J., & Qin, P. (2010). Seasonal spring peaks
of suicide in victims with and without prior history of hospitalization
for mood disorders. *Journal of Affective Disorders, 121*, 88–93.

Putnam, F.W., Guroff, J, J., Silberman, E. K., Barban, L., & Post, R. M.
(1986). The clinical phenomenology of multiple personality disorder: A
review of 100 recent cases. *Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 47*,
285–293.

Rachman, S. (1977). The conditioning theory of fear acquisition: A
critical examination. *Behaviour Theory and Research, 15*, 375–387.

Regier, D. A., Kuhl, E. A., & Kupfer, D. A. (2012). DSM-5:
Classification and criteria changes. *World Psychiatry, 12*, 92–98.

Rhee, S. H., & Waldman, I. D. (2002). Genetic and environmental
influences on antisocial behavior: A meta-analysis of twin and adoption
studies. *Psychological Bulletin, 128*, 490–529.

Robinson, M. S., & Alloy, L. B. (2003). Negative cognitive styles and
stress-reactive rumination interact to predict depression: A prospective
study. *Cognitive Therapy and Research, 27*, 275–292.

Roche, T. (2002, March 18). Andrea Yates: More to the story. *Time*.
Retrieved from
http://content.time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599,218445,00.html.

Root, B. A. (2000). *Understanding panic and other anxiety disorders*.
Jackson, MS: University Press of Mississippi.

Ross, C. A., Miller, S. D., Reagor, P., Bjornson, L., Fraser, G. A., &
Anderson, G. (1990). Structured interview data on 102 cases of multiple
personality disorder from four centers. The *American Journal of
Psychiatry, 147*, 596–601.

Rothschild, A. J. (1999). Mood disorders. In A. M. Nicholi, Jr. (Ed.),
*The Harvard guide to psychiatry* (pp. 281–307). Cambridge, MA: The
Belknap Press of Harvard University.

Ruder, T. D., Hatch, G. M., Ampanozi, G., Thali, M. J., & Fischer, N.
(2011). Suicide announcement on Facebook. *Crisis, 35*, 280–282.

Ruscio, A. M., Stein, D. J., Chiu, W. T., & Kessler, R. C. (2010). The
epidemiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder in the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication. *Molecular Psychiatry, 15*, 53–63.

Rushworth, M. F., Noonan, M. P., Boorman, E. D., Walton, M. E., &
Behrens, T. E. (2011). Frontal cortex and reward-guided learning and
decision-making. *Neuron, 70*, 1054–1069.

Rotge, J. Y., Guehl, D., Dilharreguy, B., Cuny, E., Tignol, J., Biolac,
B., . . . Aouizerate, B. (2008). Provocation of obsessive-compulsive
symptoms: A quantitative voxel-based meta-analysis of functional
neuroimaging studies. *Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, 33*,
405–412.

Saxena, S., Bota, R. G., & Brody, A. L. (2001). Brain-behavior
relationships in obsessive- compulsive disorder. *Seminars in Clinical
Neuropsychiatry, 6*, 82–101.

Schwartz, T. (1981). *The hillside strangler: A murderer’s mind*. New
York, NY: New American Library.

Seligman, M. E. P. (1971). Phobias and preparedness. *Behavioral
Therapy, 2*, 307–320.

Shih, R. A., Belmonte, P. L., & Zandi, P. P. (2004). A review of the
evidence from family, twin, and adoption studies for a genetic
contribution to adult psychiatric disorders. *International Review of
Psychiatry, 16*, 260–283.

Siegle, G. J., Thompson, W., Carter, C. S., Steinhauer, S. R., & Thase,
M. E. (2007). Increased amygdala and decreased dorsolateral prefrontal
BOLD responses in unipolar depression: Related and independent features.
*Biological Psychiatry, 61*, 198–209.

Silverstein, C. (2009). The implications of removing homosexuality from
the DSM as a mental disorder. *Archives of Sexual Behavior, 38*,
161–163.

Simon, D., Kaufmann, C., Müsch, K., Kischkel, E., & Kathmann, N. (2010).
Fronto-striato-limbic hyperactivation in obsessive-compulsive disorder
during individually tailored symptom provocation. *Psychophysiology,
47(4)*, 728–738. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8986.2010.00980.x

Snyder, S. H. (1976). The dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia: Focus on
the dopamine receptor. *The American Journal of Psychiatry, 133*,
197–202.

Stack, S. (2000). Media impacts on suicide: A quantitative review of 243
findings. *Social Science* *Quarterly, 81*, 957–971.

Stanley, B., Molcho, A., Stanley, M., Winchel, R., Gameroff, M. J.,
Parson, B., & Mann, J. J. (2000). Association of aggressive behavior
with altered serotonergic function in patients who are not suicidal.
*American Journal of Psychiatry, 157*, 609–614.

Stein, M. B., & Kean, Y. M. (2000). Disability and quality of life in
social phobia: Epidemiological findings. *The American Journal of
Psychiatry, 157*, 1606–1613.

Steinmetz, J. E., Tracy, J. A., & Green, J. T. (2001). Classical
eyeblink conditioning: Clinical models and applications. *Integrative
Physiological and Behavioral Science, 36*, 220–238.

Surguladze, S., Brammer, M. J., Keedwell, P., Giampietro, V., Young, A.
W., Travis, M. J., . . . Phillips, M. L. (2005). A differential pattern
of neural response toward sad versus happy facial expressions in major
depressive disorder. *Biological Psychiatry, 57*, 201–209.

Szasz, T. S. (1960). The myth of mental illness. *American Psychologist,
15*, 113–118.

Szasz, T. S. (2010). *The myth of mental illness: Foundations of a
theory of personal conduct*. New York, NY: HarperCollins (Original work
published 1961)

Szasz, T. S. (1965). Legal and moral aspects of homosexuality. In J.
Marmor (Ed.), *Sexual inversion: The multiple roots of homosexuality*
(pp. 124–139). New York, NY: Basic Books.

Swanson, J. M., Kinsbourne, M., Nigg, J., Lanphear, B., Stephanatos, G.,
Volkow, N., . . . Wadhwa, P. D. (2007). Etiologic subtypes of
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: Brain imaging, molecular
genetic and environmental factors and the dopamine hypothesis.
*Neuropsychology Review*, 17, 39–59.

Thakur, G. A., Sengupta, S. M., Grizenko, N., Schmitz, N., Pagé, V., &
Joober, R. (2013). Maternal smoking during pregnancy and ADHD: A
comprehensive clinical and neurocognitive characterization. *Nicotine
and Tobacco Research*, 15, 149–157.

Thase, M. E. (2009). Neurobiological aspects of depression. In I. H.
Gotlib & C. L. Hammen (Eds.), *Handbook of depression* (pp. 187–217).
New York, NY: Guilford Press.

The Associated Press. (2013, May 15). New psychiatric manual, DSM-5,
faces criticism for turning “normal” human problems into mental illness
[Web log post]. Retrieved from
http://www.nydailynews.com/life-style/health/shrinks-critics-face-new-psychiatric-manual-article-1.1344935

Thompson, A., Molina, B. S. G., Pelham, W., & Gnagy, E. M. (2007). Risky
driving in adolescents and young adults with childhood ADHD. *Journal of
Pediatric Psychology*, 32, 745–759.

Thornicroft, G. (1990). Cannabis and psychosis: Is there epidemiological
evidence for an association? *British Journal of Psychiatry, 157*,
25–33.

Tienari, P., Wynne, L. C., Sorri, A., Lahti, I., Lasky, K., Moring, J.,
. . . Wahlberg, K. (2004). Genotype-environment interaction in
schizophrenia spectrum disorder. *British Journal of Psychiatry, 184*,
216–222.

Trezza V., Cuomo, V., & Vanderschuren, L. J. (2008). Cannabis and the
developing brain: Insights from behavior. *European Journal of
Pharmacology, 585*, 441–452.

Tsuang, M. T., Farone, S. V., & Green, A. I. (1999). Schizophrenia and
other psychotic disorders. In A. M. Nicholi, Jr. (Ed.), The Harvard
guide to psychiatry (pp. 240–280). Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press.

van Praag, H. M. (2005). Can stress cause depression? [Supplemental
material]. *The World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 6*\ (S2), 5–22.

Victor, T. A., Furey, M. L., Fromm, S. J., Öhman, A., & Drevets, W. C.
(2010). Relationship between amygdala responses to masked faces and mood
state and treatment in major depressive disorder. *Archives of General
Psychiatry, 67*, 1128–1138.

Volkow N. D., Fowler J. S., Logan J., Alexoff D., Zhu W., Telang F., . .
. Apelskog-Torres K. (2009). Effects of modafinil on dopamine and
dopamine transporters in the male human brain: clinical implications.
*Journal of the American Medical Association*, 301, 1148–1154.

Wakefield, J. C. (1992). The concept of mental disorder: On the boundary
between biological facts and social values. *American Psychologist, 47*,
373–388.

Waller, J. (2009a). Looking back: Dancing plagues and mass hysteria.
*The Psychologist, 22*\ (7), 644–647.

Waller, J. (2009b, February 21). A forgotten plague: Making sense of
dancing mania. *The Lancet, 373*\ (9664), 624– 625.
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60386-X

Weiser, E. B. (2007). The prevalence of anxiety disorders among adults
with Asthma: A meta-analytic review. *Journal of Clinical Psychology in
Medical Settings, 14*, 297–307.

White, C. N., Gunderson, J. G., Zanarani, M. C., & Hudson, J. I. (2003).
Family studies of borderline personality disorder: A review. *Harvard
Review of Psychiatry, 11*, 8–19.

Whooley, M. A. (2006). Depression and cardiovascular disease: Healing
the broken-hearted. *Journal of the American Medical Association, 295*,
2874–2881.

Wilcox, H. C., Conner, K. R., & Caine, E. D. (2004). Association of
alcohol and drug use disorders and completed suicide: An empirical
review of cohort studies [Supplemental material]. *Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 76*, S11–S19.

Wing, L., Gould, J., & Gillberg, C. (2011). Autism spectrum disorders in
the DSM-V: Better or worse than the DSM IV? *Research in Developmental
Disabilities*, 32, 768–773.

Wisner, K. L., Sit, D. K. Y., McShea, M. C., Rizzo, D. M., Zoretich, R.
A., Hughes, C. L., Hanusa, B. H. (2013). Onset timing, thoughts of
self-harm, and diagnoses in postpartum women with screen-positive
depression findings. *JAMA Psychiatry, 70*, 490–498.

Wolraich, M. L., Wilson, D. B., & White, J. W. (1995). The effect of
sugar on behavior or cognition in children. *Journal of the American
Medical Association*, 274, 1617–1621.

World Health Organization (WHO). (2013). *International classification
of diseases (ICD)*. Retrieved from
http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/

Wyatt, W. J., & Midkiff, D. M. (2006). Biological psychiatry: A practice
in search of a science. *Behavior and Social Issues, 15*, 132–151.

Xie, P., Kranzler, H. R., Poling, J., Stein, M. B., Anton, R. F., Brady,
K., Gelernter, J. (2009). Interactive effect of stressful life events
and the serotonin transporter *5-HTTLPR* genotype on posttraumatic
stress disorder diagnosis in 2 independent populations. *Archives of
General Psychology, 66*, 1201–1209.

Zachar, P., & Kendler, K. S. (2007). Psychiatric disorders: A conceptual
taxonomy. *The American Journal of Psychiatry, 16*, 557–565.

Zuckerman, M. (1999). *Vulnerability to psychopathology: A biosocial
model*. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

.. |A photograph shows several key members of the United States military accompanied by a crowd as they stand facing toward a wreath. All hold their right arms in salute or placed across their chests.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_15_00_NavyYard.jpg
