=============
Schizophrenia
=============



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Recognize the
   essential nature of schizophrenia, avoiding the misconception that it
   involves a split personality \* Categorize and describe the major
   symptoms of schizophrenia \* Understand the interplay between
   genetic, biological, and environmental factors that are associated
   with the development of schizophrenia \* Discuss the importance of
   research examining prodromal symptoms of schizophrenia

**Schizophrenia**\ {: data-type=“term”} is a devastating psychological
disorder that is characterized by major disturbances in thought,
perception, emotion, and behavior. About 1% of the population
experiences schizophrenia in their lifetime, and usually the disorder is
first diagnosed during early adulthood (early to mid-20s). Most people
with schizophrenia experience significant difficulties in many
day-to-day activities, such as holding a job, paying bills, caring for
oneself (grooming and hygiene), and maintaining relationships with
others. Frequent hospitalizations are more often the rule rather than
the exception with schizophrenia. Even when they receive the best
treatments available, many with schizophrenia will continue to
experience serious social and occupational impairment throughout their
lives.

What is schizophrenia? First, schizophrenia is *not* a condition
involving a split personality; that is, schizophrenia is not the same
thing as dissociative identity disorder (better known as multiple
personality disorder). These disorders are sometimes confused because
the word schizophrenia first coined by the Swiss psychiatrist Eugen
Bleuler in 1911, derives from Greek words that refer to a “splitting”
(schizo) of psychic functions (phrene) (Green, 2001).

Schizophrenia is considered a psychotic disorder, or one in which the
person’s thoughts, perceptions, and behaviors are impaired to the point
where she is not able to function normally in life. In informal terms,
one who suffers from a psychotic disorder (that is, has a psychosis) is
disconnected from the world in which most of us live.

SYMPTOMS OF SCHIZOPHRENIA
=========================

The main symptoms of schizophrenia include hallucinations, delusions,
disorganized thinking, disorganized or abnormal motor behavior, and
negative symptoms (APA, 2013). A **hallucination**\ {: data-type=“term”}
is a perceptual experience that occurs in the absence of external
stimulation. Auditory hallucinations (hearing voices) occur in roughly
two-thirds of patients with schizophrenia and are by far the most common
form of hallucination (Andreasen, 1987). The voices may be familiar or
unfamiliar, they may have a conversation or argue, or the voices may
provide a running commentary on the person’s behavior (Tsuang, Farone, &
Green, 1999).

Less common are visual hallucinations (seeing things that are not there)
and olfactory hallucinations (smelling odors that are not actually
present).

**Delusions**\ {: data-type=“term”} are beliefs that are contrary to
reality and are firmly held even in the face of contradictory evidence.
Many of us hold beliefs that some would consider odd, but a delusion is
easily identified because it is clearly absurd. A person with
schizophrenia may believe that his mother is plotting with the FBI to
poison his coffee, or that his neighbor is an enemy spy who wants to
kill him. These kinds of delusions are known as **paranoid
delusions**\ {: data-type=“term”}, which involve the (false) belief that
other people or agencies are plotting to harm the person. People with
schizophrenia also may hold **grandiose delusions**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, beliefs that one holds special power, unique
knowledge, or is extremely important. For example, the person who claims
to be Jesus Christ, or who claims to have knowledge going back 5,000
years, or who claims to be a great philosopher is experiencing grandiose
delusions. Other delusions include the belief that one’s thoughts are
being removed (thought withdrawal) or thoughts have been placed inside
one’s head (thought insertion). Another type of delusion is **somatic
delusion**\ {: data-type=“term”}, which is the belief that something
highly abnormal is happening to one’s body (e.g., that one’s kidneys are
being eaten by cockroaches).

**Disorganized thinking**\ {: data-type=“term”} refers to disjointed and
incoherent thought processes—usually detected by what a person says. The
person might ramble, exhibit loose associations (jump from topic to
topic), or talk in a way that is so disorganized and incomprehensible
that it seems as though the person is randomly combining words.
Disorganized thinking is also exhibited by blatantly illogical remarks
(e.g., “Fenway Park is in Boston. I live in Boston. Therefore, I live at
Fenway Park.”) and by tangentiality: responding to others’ statements or
questions by remarks that are either barely related or unrelated to what
was said or asked. For example, if a person diagnosed with schizophrenia
is asked if she is interested in receiving special job training, she
might state that she once rode on a train somewhere. To a person with
schizophrenia, the tangential (slightly related) connection between job
*training* and riding a *train* are sufficient enough to cause such a
response.

**Disorganized or abnormal motor behavior**\ {: data-type=“term”} refers
to unusual behaviors and movements: becoming unusually active,
exhibiting silly child-like behaviors (giggling and self-absorbed
smiling), engaging in repeated and purposeless movements, or displaying
odd facial expressions and gestures. In some cases, the person will
exhibit **catatonic behaviors**\ {: data-type=“term”}, which show
decreased reactivity to the environment, such as posturing, in which the
person maintains a rigid and bizarre posture for long periods of time,
or catatonic stupor, a complete lack of movement and verbal behavior.

**Negative symptoms**\ {: data-type=“term”} are those that reflect
noticeable decreases and absences in certain behaviors, emotions, or
drives (Green, 2001). A person who exhibits diminished emotional
expression shows no emotion in his facial expressions, speech, or
movements, even when such expressions are normal or expected. Avolition
is characterized by a lack of motivation to engage in self-initiated and
meaningful activity, including the most basic of tasks, such as bathing
and grooming. Alogia refers to reduced speech output; in simple terms,
patients do not say much. Another negative symptom is asociality, or
social withdrawal and lack of interest in engaging in social
interactions with others. A final negative symptom, anhedonia, refers to
an inability to experience pleasure. One who exhibits anhedonia
expresses little interest in what most people consider to be pleasurable
activities, such as hobbies, recreation, or sexual activity.

.. container:: psychology link-to-learning

   Watch this `video <http://openstax.org/l/Schizo1>`__ and try to
   identify which classic symptoms of schizophrenia are shown.

CAUSES OF SCHIZOPHRENIA
=======================

There is considerable evidence suggesting that schizophrenia has a
genetic basis. The risk of developing schizophrenia is nearly 6 times
greater if one has a parent with schizophrenia than if one does not
(Goldstein, Buka, Seidman, & Tsuang, 2010). Additionally, one’s risk of
developing schizophrenia increases as genetic relatedness to family
members diagnosed with schizophrenia increases (Gottesman, 2001).

Genes
-----

When considering the role of genetics in schizophrenia, as in any
disorder, conclusions based on family and twin studies are subject to
criticism. This is because family members who are closely related (such
as siblings) are more likely to share similar environments than are
family members who are less closely related (such as cousins); further,
identical twins may be more likely to be treated similarly by others
than might fraternal twins. Thus, family and twin studies cannot
completely rule out the possible effects of shared environments and
experiences. Such problems can be corrected by using adoption studies,
in which children are separated from their parents at an early age. One
of the first adoption studies of schizophrenia conducted by Heston
(1966) followed 97 adoptees, including 47 who were born to mothers with
schizophrenia, over a 36-year period. Five of the 47 adoptees (11%)
whose mothers had schizophrenia were later diagnosed with schizophrenia,
compared to none of the 50 control adoptees. Other adoption studies have
consistently reported that for adoptees who are later diagnosed with
schizophrenia, their biological relatives have a higher risk of
schizophrenia than do adoptive relatives (Shih, Belmonte, & Zandi,
2004).

Although adoption studies have supported the hypothesis that genetic
factors contribute to schizophrenia, they have also demonstrated that
the disorder most likely arises from a combination of genetic and
environmental factors, rather than just genes themselves. For example,
investigators in one study examined the rates of schizophrenia among 303
adoptees (Tienari et al., 2004). A total of 145 of the adoptees had
biological mothers with schizophrenia; these adoptees constituted the
high genetic risk group. The other 158 adoptees had mothers with no
psychiatric history; these adoptees composed the low genetic risk group.
The researchers managed to determine whether the adoptees’ families were
either healthy or disturbed. For example, the adoptees were considered
to be raised in a disturbed family environment if the family exhibited a
lot of criticism, conflict, and a lack of problem-solving skills. The
findings revealed that adoptees whose mothers had schizophrenia (high
genetic risk) *and* who had been raised in a disturbed family
environment were much more likely to develop schizophrenia or another
psychotic disorder (36.8%) than were adoptees whose biological mothers
had schizophrenia but who had been raised in a healthy environment
(5.8%), or than adoptees with a low genetic risk who were raised in
either a disturbed (5.3%) or healthy (4.8%) environment. Because the
adoptees who were at high genetic risk were likely to develop
schizophrenia *only* if they were raised in a disturbed home
environment, this study supports a diathesis-stress interpretation of
schizophrenia—both genetic vulnerability and environmental stress are
necessary for schizophrenia to develop, genes alone do not show the
complete picture.

Neurotransmitters
-----------------

If we accept that schizophrenia is at least partly genetic in origin, as
it seems to be, it makes sense that the next step should be to identify
biological abnormalities commonly found in people with the disorder.
Perhaps not surprisingly, a number of neurobiological factors have
indeed been found to be related to schizophrenia. One such factor that
has received considerable attention for many years is the
neurotransmitter dopamine. Interest in the role of dopamine in
schizophrenia was stimulated by two sets of findings: drugs that
increase dopamine levels can produce schizophrenia-like symptoms, and
medications that block dopamine activity reduce the symptoms (Howes &
Kapur, 2009). The **dopamine hypothesis**\ {: data-type=“term”} of
schizophrenia proposed that an overabundance of dopamine or too many
dopamine receptors are responsible for the onset and maintenance of
schizophrenia (Snyder, 1976). More recent work in this area suggests
that abnormalities in dopamine vary by brain region and thus contribute
to symptoms in unique ways. In general, this research has suggested that
an overabundance of dopamine in the limbic system may be responsible for
some symptoms, such as hallucinations and delusions, whereas low levels
of dopamine in the prefrontal cortex might be responsible primarily for
the negative symptoms (avolition, alogia, asociality, and anhedonia)
(Davis, Kahn, Ko, & Davidson, 1991). In recent years, serotonin has
received attention, and newer antipsychotic medications used to treat
the disorder work by blocking serotonin receptors (Baumeister & Hawkins,
2004).

Brain Anatomy
-------------

Brain imaging studies reveal that people with schizophrenia have
enlarged **ventricles**\ {: data-type=“term”}, the cavities within the
brain that contain cerebral spinal fluid (Green, 2001). This finding is
important because larger than normal ventricles suggests that various
brain regions are reduced in size, thus implying that schizophrenia is
associated with a loss of brain tissue. In addition, many people with
schizophrenia display a reduction in gray matter (cell bodies of
neurons) in the frontal lobes (Lawrie & Abukmeil, 1998), and many show
less frontal lobe activity when performing cognitive tasks (Buchsbaum et
al., 1990). The frontal lobes are important in a variety of complex
cognitive functions, such as planning and executing behavior, attention,
speech, movement, and problem solving. Hence, abnormalities in this
region provide merit in explaining why people with schizophrenia
experience deficits in these of areas.

Events During Pregnancy
-----------------------

Why do people with schizophrenia have these brain abnormalities? A
number of environmental factors that could impact normal brain
development might be at fault. High rates of obstetric complications in
the births of children who later developed schizophrenia have been
reported (Cannon, Jones, & Murray, 2002). In addition, people are at an
increased risk for developing schizophrenia if their mother was exposed
to influenza during the first trimester of pregnancy (Brown et al.,
2004). Research has also suggested that a mother’s emotional stress
during pregnancy may increase the risk of schizophrenia in offspring.
One study reported that the risk of schizophrenia is elevated
substantially in offspring whose mothers experienced the death of a
relative during the first trimester of pregnancy (Khashan et al., 2008).

Marijuana
---------

Another variable that is linked to schizophrenia is **marijuana**\ {:
data-type=“term” .no-emphasis} use. Although a number of reports have
shown that individuals with schizophrenia are more likely to use
marijuana than are individuals without schizophrenia (Thornicroft,
1990), such investigations cannot determine if marijuana use leads to
schizophrenia, or vice versa. However, a number of longitudinal studies
have suggested that marijuana use is, in fact, a risk factor for
schizophrenia. A classic investigation of over 45,000 Swedish conscripts
who were followed up after 15 years found that those individuals who had
reported using marijuana at least once by the time of conscription were
more than 2 times as likely to develop schizophrenia during the ensuing
15 years than were those who reported never using marijuana; those who
had indicated using marijuana 50 or more times were 6 times as likely to
develop schizophrenia (Andréasson, Allbeck, Engström, & Rydberg, 1987).
More recently, a review of 35 longitudinal studies found a substantially
increased risk of schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders in people
who had used marijuana, with the greatest risk in the most frequent
users (Moore et al., 2007). Other work has found that marijuana use is
associated with an onset of psychotic disorders at an earlier age
(Large, Sharma, Compton, Slade, & Nielssen, 2011). Overall, the
available evidence seems to indicate that marijuana use plays a causal
role in the development of schizophrenia, although it is important to
point out that marijuana use is not an essential or sufficient risk
factor as not all people with schizophrenia have used marijuana and the
majority of marijuana users do not develop schizophrenia (Casadio,
Fernandes, Murray, & Di Forti, 2011). One plausible interpretation of
the data is that early marijuana use may disrupt normal brain
development during important early maturation periods in adolescence
(Trezza, Cuomo, & Vanderschuren, 2008). Thus, early marijuana use may
set the stage for the development of schizophrenia and other psychotic
disorders, especially among individuals with an established
vulnerability (Casadio et al., 2011).

SCHIZOPHRENIA: EARLY WARNING SIGNS
==================================

Early detection and treatment of conditions such as heart disease and
cancer have improved survival rates and quality of life for people who
suffer from these conditions. A new approach involves identifying people
who show minor symptoms of psychosis, such as unusual thought content,
paranoia, odd communication, delusions, problems at school or work, and
a decline in social functioning—which are coined **prodromal
symptoms**\ {: data-type=“term”}—and following these individuals over
time to determine which of them develop a psychotic disorder and which
factors best predict such a disorder. A number of factors have been
identified that predict a greater likelihood that prodromal individuals
will develop a psychotic disorder: genetic risk (a family history of
psychosis), recent deterioration in functioning, high levels of unusual
thought content, high levels of suspicion or paranoia, poor social
functioning, and a history of substance abuse (Fusar-Poli et al., 2013).
Further research will enable a more accurate prediction of those at
greatest risk for developing schizophrenia, and thus to whom early
intervention efforts should be directed.

Summary
=======

Schizophrenia is a severe disorder characterized by a complete breakdown
in one’s ability to function in life; it often requires hospitalization.
People with schizophrenia experience hallucinations and delusions, and
they have extreme difficulty regulating their emotions and behavior.
Thinking is incoherent and disorganized, behavior is extremely bizarre,
emotions are flat, and motivation to engage in most basic life
activities is lacking. Considerable evidence shows that genetic factors
play a central role in schizophrenia; however, adoption studies have
highlighted the additional importance of environmental factors.
Neurotransmitter and brain abnormalities, which may be linked to
environmental factors such as obstetric complications or exposure to
influenza during the gestational period, have also been implicated. A
promising new area of schizophrenia research involves identifying
individuals who show prodromal symptoms and following them over time to
determine which factors best predict the development of schizophrenia.
Future research may enable us to pinpoint those especially at risk for
developing schizophrenia and who may benefit from early intervention.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Clifford falsely believes that the police have planted secret
      cameras in his home to monitor his every movement. Clifford’s
      belief is an example of \________.

      1. a delusion
      2. a hallucination
      3. tangentiality
      4. a negative symptom {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      A study of adoptees whose biological mothers had schizophrenia
      found that the adoptees were most likely to develop schizophrenia
      \________.

      1. if their childhood friends later developed schizophrenia
      2. if they abused drugs during adolescence
      3. if they were raised in a disturbed adoptive home environment
      4. regardless of whether they were raised in a healthy or
         disturbed home environment {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

Critical Thinking Question
==========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Why is research following individuals who show prodromal symptoms
      of schizophrenia so important?

   .. container::

      This kind of research is important because it enables
      investigators to identify potential warning signs that predict the
      onset of schizophrenia. Once such factors are identified,
      interventions may be developed.

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   catatonic behavior
      decreased reactivity to the environment; includes posturing and
      catatonic stupor ^
   delusion
      belief that is contrary to reality and is firmly held, despite
      contradictory evidence ^
   disorganized/abnormal motor behavior
      highly unusual behaviors and movements (such as child-like
      behaviors), repeated and purposeless movements, and displaying odd
      facial expressions and gestures ^
   disorganized thinking
      disjointed and incoherent thought processes, usually detected by
      what a person says ^
   dopamine hypothesis
      theory of schizophrenia that proposes that an overabundance of
      dopamine or dopamine receptors is responsible for the onset and
      maintenance of schizophrenia ^
   grandiose delusion
      characterized by beliefs that one holds special power, unique
      knowledge, or is extremely important ^
   hallucination
      perceptual experience that occurs in the absence of external
      stimulation, such as the auditory hallucinations (hearing voices)
      common to schizophrenia ^
   negative symptom
      characterized by decreases and absences in certain normal
      behaviors, emotions, or drives, such as an expressionless face,
      lack of motivation to engage in activities, reduced speech, lack
      of social engagement, and inability to experience pleasure ^
   paranoid delusion
      characterized by beliefs that others are out to harm them ^
   prodromal symptom
      in schizophrenia, one of the early minor symptoms of psychosis ^
   schizophrenia
      severe disorder characterized by major disturbances in thought,
      perception, emotion, and behavior with symptoms that include
      hallucinations, delusions, disorganized thinking and behavior, and
      negative symptoms ^
   somatic delusion
      belief that something highly unusual is happening to one’s body or
      internal organs ^
   ventricle
      one of the fluid-filled cavities within the brain
