=====================
Personality Disorders
=====================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Describe the
   nature of personality disorders and how they differ from other
   disorders \* List and distinguish between the three clusters of
   personality disorders \* Identify the basic features of borderline
   personality disorder and antisocial personality disorder, and the
   factors that are important in the etiology of both

The term *personality* refers loosely to one’s stable, consistent, and
distinctive way of thinking about, feeling, acting, and relating to the
world. People with **personality disorders**\ {: data-type=“term”}
exhibit a personality style that differs markedly from the expectations
of their culture, is pervasive and inflexible, begins in adolescence or
early adulthood, and causes distress or impairment (APA, 2013).
Generally, individuals with these disorders exhibit enduring personality
styles that are extremely troubling and often create problems for them
and those with whom they come into contact. Their maladaptive
personality styles frequently bring them into conflict with others,
disrupt their ability to develop and maintain social relationships, and
prevent them from accomplishing realistic life goals.

The DSM-5 recognizes 10 personality disorders, organized into 3
different clusters. Cluster A disorders include **paranoid personality
disorder**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}, **schizoid personality
disorder**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}, and **schizotypal
personality disorder**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}. People with
these disorders display a personality style that is odd or eccentric.
Cluster B disorders include antisocial personality disorder,
**histrionic personality disorder**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis},
**narcissistic personality disorder**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis}, and borderline personality disorder. People with these
disorders usually are impulsive, overly dramatic, highly emotional, and
erratic. Cluster C disorders include **avoidant personality
disorder**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}, **dependent personality
disorder**\ {: data-type=“term” .no-emphasis}, and
**obsessive-compulsive personality disorder**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis} (which is not the same thing as obsessive-compulsive
disorder). People with these disorders often appear to be nervous and
fearful. `[link] <#Table_15_10_01>`__ provides a description of each of
the DSM-5 personality disorders:

.. raw:: html

   <table id="Table_15_10_01" summary="A table provides basic descriptions of the DSM-5 personality disorders and their associated clusters. Cluster A includes Paranoid (harbors a pervasive and unjustifiable suspiciousness and mistrust of others; reluctant to confide in or become close to others; reads hidden demeaning or threatening meaning into benign remarks or events; takes offense easily and bears grudges; not due to schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders), Schizoid (lacks interest and desire to form relationships with others; aloof and shows emotional coldness and detachment; indifferent to approval or criticism of others; lacks close friends or confidants; not due to schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders, not an autism spectrum disorder), and Schizotypal (exhibits eccentricities in thought, perception, emotion, speech, and behavior; shows suspiciousness or paranoia; has unusual perceptual experiences; speech is often idiosyncratic; displays inappropriate emotions; lacks friends or confidants; not due to schizophrenia or other psychotic disorder, or to autism spectrum disorder). Cluster B includes Antisocial (continuously violates the rights of others; history of antisocial tendencies prior to age 15; often lies, fights, and has problems with the law; impulsive and fails to think ahead; can be deceitful and manipulative in order to gain profit or pleasure; irresponsible and often fails to hold down a job or pay financial debts; lacks feelings for others and remorse over misdeeds), Histrionic (excessively overdramatic, emotional, and theatrical; feels uncomfortable when not the center of others’ attention; behavior is often inappropriately seductive or provocative; speech is highly emotional but often vague and diffuse; emotions are shallow and often shift rapidly; may alienate friends with demands for constant attention), Narcissistic (overinflated and unjustified sense of self-importance and preoccupied with fantasies of success; believes he is entitled to special treatment from others; shows arrogant attitudes and behaviors; takes advantage of others; lacks empathy), and Borderline (unstable in self-image, mood, and behavior; cannot tolerate being alone and experiences chronic feelings of emptiness; unstable and intense relationships with others; behavior is impulsive, unpredictable, and sometimes self-damaging; shows inappropriate and intense anger; makes suicidal gestures). Cluster C includes Avoidant (socially inhibited and oversensitive to negative evaluation; avoids occupations that involve interpersonal contact because of fears of criticism or rejection; avoids relationships with others unless guaranteed to be accepted unconditionally; feels inadequate and views self as socially inept and unappealing; unwilling to take risks or engage in new activities if they may prove embarrassing), Dependent (allows others to take over and run her life; is submissive, clingy, and fears separation; cannot make decisions without advice and reassurance from others; lacks self-confidence; cannot do things on her own; feels uncomfortable or helpless when alone), and Obsessive-Compulsive (pervasive need for perfectionism that interferes with the ability to complete tasks; preoccupied with details, rules, order, and schedules; excessively devoted to work at the expense of leisure and friendships; rigid, inflexible, and stubborn; insists things be done his way; miserly with money).">

.. raw:: html

   <caption>

DSM-5 Personality Disorders

.. raw:: html

   </caption>

.. raw:: html

   <colgroup>

.. raw:: html

   <col />

.. raw:: html

   <col />

.. raw:: html

   <col data-align="center" />

.. raw:: html

   </colgroup>

.. raw:: html

   <thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th data-align="left">

DSM-5 Personality Disorder

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th data-align="center">

Description

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Cluster

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tbody>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Paranoid

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

harbors a pervasive and unjustifiable suspiciousness and mistrust of
others; reluctant to confide in or become close to others; reads hidden
demeaning or threatening meaning into benign remarks or events; takes
offense easily and bears grudges; not due to schizophrenia or other
psychotic disorders

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

A

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Schizoid

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

lacks interest and desire to form relationships with others; aloof and
shows emotional coldness and detachment; indifferent to approval or
criticism of others; lacks close friends or confidants; not due to
schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders, not an autism spectrum
disorder

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

A

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Schizotypal

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

exhibits eccentricities in thought, perception, emotion, speech, and
behavior; shows suspiciousness or paranoia; has unusual perceptual
experiences; speech is often idiosyncratic; displays inappropriate
emotions; lacks friends or confidants; not due to schizophrenia or other
psychotic disorder, or to autism spectrum disorder

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

A

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Antisocial

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

continuously violates the rights of others; history of antisocial
tendencies prior to age 15; often lies, fights, and has problems with
the law; impulsive and fails to think ahead; can be deceitful and
manipulative in order to gain profit or pleasure; irresponsible and
often fails to hold down a job or pay financial debts; lacks feelings
for others and remorse over misdeeds

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

B

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Histrionic

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

excessively overdramatic, emotional, and theatrical; feels uncomfortable
when not the center of others’ attention; behavior is often
inappropriately seductive or provocative; speech is highly emotional but
often vague and diffuse; emotions are shallow and often shift rapidly;
may alienate friends with demands for constant attention

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

B

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Narcissistic

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

overinflated and unjustified sense of self-importance and preoccupied
with fantasies of success; believes he is entitled to special treatment
from others; shows arrogant attitudes and behaviors; takes advantage of
others; lacks empathy

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

B

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Borderline

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

unstable in self-image, mood, and behavior; cannot tolerate being alone
and experiences chronic feelings of emptiness; unstable and intense
relationships with others; behavior is impulsive, unpredictable, and
sometimes self-damaging; shows inappropriate and intense anger; makes
suicidal gestures

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

B

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Avoidant

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

socially inhibited and oversensitive to negative evaluation; avoids
occupations that involve interpersonal contact because of fears of
criticism or rejection; avoids relationships with others unless
guaranteed to be accepted unconditionally; feels inadequate and views
self as socially inept and unappealing; unwilling to take risks or
engage in new activities if they may prove embarrassing

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

C

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Dependent

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

allows others to take over and run her life; is submissive, clingy, and
fears separation; cannot make decisions without advice and reassurance
from others; lacks self-confidence; cannot do things on her own; feels
uncomfortable or helpless when alone

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

C

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td data-align="left">

Obsessive-Compulsive

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

pervasive need for perfectionism that interferes with the ability to
complete tasks; preoccupied with details, rules, order, and schedules;
excessively devoted to work at the expense of leisure and friendships;
rigid, inflexible, and stubborn; insists things be done his way; miserly
with money

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

C

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </tbody>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

Slightly over 9% of the U.S. population suffers from a personality
disorder, with avoidant and schizoid personality disorders the most
frequent (Lezenweger, Lane, Loranger, & Kessler, 2007). Two of these
personality disorders, borderline personality disorder and antisocial
personality disorder, are regarded by many as especially problematic.

BORDERLINE PERSONALITY DISORDER
===============================

The “borderline” in borderline personality disorder was originally
coined in the late 1930s in an effort to describe patients who appeared
anxious, but were prone to brief psychotic experiences—that is, patients
who were thought to be literally on the borderline between anxiety and
psychosis (Freeman, Stone, Martin, & Reinecke, 2005). Today,
**borderline personality disorder**\ {: data-type=“term”} has a
completely different meaning. Borderline personality disorder is
characterized chiefly by instability in interpersonal relationships,
self-image, and mood, as well as marked impulsivity (APA, 2013). People
with borderline personality disorder cannot tolerate the thought of
being alone and will make frantic efforts (including making suicidal
gestures and engaging in self-mutilation) to avoid abandonment or
separation (whether real or imagined). Their relationships are intense
and unstable; for example, a lover may be idealized early in a
relationship, but then later vilified at the slightest sign she appears
to no longer show interest. These individuals have an unstable view of
self and, thus, might suddenly display a shift in personal attitudes,
interests, career plans, and choice of friends. For example, a law
school student may, despite having invested tens of thousands of dollars
toward earning a law degree and despite having performed well in the
program, consider dropping out and pursuing a career in another field.
People with borderline personality disorder may be highly impulsive and
may engage in reckless and self-destructive behaviors such as excessive
gambling, spending money irresponsibly, substance abuse, engaging in
unsafe sex, and reckless driving. They sometimes show intense and
inappropriate anger that they have difficulty controlling, and they can
be moody, sarcastic, bitter, and verbally abusive.

The prevalence of borderline personality disorder in the U.S. population
is estimated to be around 1.4% (Lezenweger et al., 2007), but the rates
are higher among those who use mental health services; approximately 10%
of mental health outpatients and 20% of psychiatric inpatients meet the
criteria for diagnosis (APA, 2013). Additionally, borderline personality
disorder is comorbid with anxiety, mood, and substance use disorders
(Lezenweger et al., 2007).

Biological Basis for Borderline Personality Disorder
----------------------------------------------------

Genetic factors appear to be important in the development of borderline
personality disorder. For example, core personality traits that
characterize this disorder, such as impulsivity and emotional
instability, show a high degree of heritability (Livesley, 2008). Also,
the rates of borderline personality disorder among relatives of people
with this disorder have been found to be as high as 24.9% (White,
Gunderson, Zanarani, & Hudson, 2003). Individuals with borderline
personality disorder report experiencing childhood physical, sexual,
and/or emotional abuse at rates far greater than those observed in the
general population (Afifi et al., 2010), indicating that environmental
factors are also crucial. These findings would suggest that borderline
personality disorder may be determined by an interaction between genetic
factors and adverse environmental experiences. Consistent with this
hypothesis, one study found that the highest rates of borderline
personality disorder were among individuals with a borderline
temperament (characterized by high novelty seeking and high
harm-avoidance) and those who experienced childhood abuse and/or neglect
(Joyce et al., 2003).

ANTISOCIAL PERSONALITY DISORDER
===============================

Most human beings live in accordance with a moral compass, a sense of
right and wrong. Most individuals learn at a very young age that there
are certain things that should not be done. We learn that we should not
lie or cheat. We are taught that it is wrong to take things that do not
belong to us, and that it is wrong to exploit others for personal gain.
We also learn the importance of living up to our responsibilities, of
doing what we say we will do. People with antisocial personality
disorder, however, do not seem to have a moral compass. These
individuals act as though they neither have a sense of nor care about
right or wrong. Not surprisingly, these people represent a serious
problem for others and for society in general.

According to the DSM-5, the individual with **antisocial personality
disorder**\ {: data-type=“term”} (sometimes referred to as psychopathy)
shows no regard at all for other people’s rights or feelings. This lack
of regard is exhibited a number of ways and can include repeatedly
performing illegal acts, lying to or conning others, impulsivity and
recklessness, irritability and aggressiveness toward others, and failure
to act in a responsible way (e.g., leaving debts unpaid) (APA, 2013).
The worst part about antisocial personality disorder, however, is that
people with this disorder have no remorse over one’s misdeeds; these
people will hurt, manipulate, exploit, and abuse others and not feel any
guilt. Signs of this disorder can emerge early in life; however, a
person must be at least 18 years old to be diagnosed with antisocial
personality disorder.

People with antisocial personality disorder seem to view the world as
self-serving and unkind. They seem to think that they should use
whatever means necessary to get by in life. They tend to view others not
as living, thinking, feeling beings, but rather as pawns to be used or
abused for a specific purpose. They often have an over-inflated sense of
themselves and can appear extremely arrogant. They frequently display
superficial charm; for example, without really meaning it they might say
exactly what they think another person wants to hear. They lack empathy:
they are incapable of understanding the emotional point-of-view of
others. People with this disorder may become involved in illegal
enterprises, show cruelty toward others, leave their jobs with no plans
to obtain another job, have multiple sexual partners, repeatedly get
into fights with others, and show reckless disregard for themselves and
others (e.g., repeated arrests for driving while intoxicated) (APA,
2013).

A useful way to conceptualize antisocial personality disorder is boiling
the diagnosis down to three major concepts: disinhibition, boldness, and
meanness (Patrick, Fowles, & Krueger, 2009). Disinhibition is a
propensity toward impulse control problems, lack of planning and
forethought, insistence on immediate gratification, and inability to
restrain behavior. Boldness describes a tendency to remain calm in
threatening situations, high self-assurance, a sense of dominance, and a
tendency toward thrill-seeking. Meanness is defined as “aggressive
resource seeking without regard for others,” and is signaled by a lack
of empathy, disdain for and lack of close relationships with others, and
a tendency to accomplish goals through cruelty (Patrick et al., 2009,
p. 913).

Risk Factors for Antisocial Personality Disorder
------------------------------------------------

Antisocial personality disorder is observed in about 3.6% of the
population; the disorder is much more common among males, with a 3 to 1
ratio of men to women, and it is more likely to occur in men who are
younger, widowed, separated, divorced, of lower socioeconomic status,
who live in urban areas, and who live in the western United States
(Compton, Conway, Stinson, Colliver, & Grant, 2005). Compared to men
with antisocial personality disorder, women with the disorder are more
likely to have experienced emotional neglect and sexual abuse during
childhood, and they are more likely to have had parents who abused
substances and who engaged in antisocial behaviors themselves (Alegria
et al., 2013).

`[link] <#Table_15_10_02>`__ shows some of the differences in the
specific types of antisocial behaviors that men and women with
antisocial personality disorder exhibit (Alegria et al., 2013).

.. raw:: html

   <table id="Table_15_10_02" summary="A table lists gender differences in antisocial personality disorder. Men with this condition tend to do things that could easily hurt themselves or others, receive three or more traffic tickets for reckless driving, have their driver&#x2019;s license suspended, destroy others&#x2019; property, start a fire on purpose, make money illegally, do anything that could lead to arrest, hit someone hard enough to injure them, and hurt an animal on purpose. Women with this condition tend to run away from home overnight, frequently miss school or work, lie frequently, forge someone&#x2019;s signature, get into a fight that comes to blows with an intimate partner, live with others besides the family for at least one month, and harass, threaten, or blackmail someone.">

.. raw:: html

   <caption>

Gender Differences in Antisocial Personality Disorder

.. raw:: html

   </caption>

.. raw:: html

   <thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Men with antisocial personality disorder are more likely than women with
antisocial personality disorder to

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Women with antisocial personality disorder are more likely than men with
antisocial personality to

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tbody>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

.. raw:: html

   <ul>

.. raw:: html

   <li>

do things that could easily hurt themselves or others

.. raw:: html

   </li>

.. raw:: html

   <li>

receive three or more traffic tickets for reckless driving

.. raw:: html

   </li>

.. raw:: html

   <li>

have their driver’s license suspended

.. raw:: html

   </li>

.. raw:: html

   <li>

destroy others’ property

.. raw:: html

   </li>

.. raw:: html

   <li>

start a fire on purpose

.. raw:: html

   </li>

.. raw:: html

   <li>

make money illegally

.. raw:: html

   </li>

.. raw:: html

   <li>

do anything that could lead to arrest

.. raw:: html

   </li>

.. raw:: html

   <li>

hit someone hard enough to injure them

.. raw:: html

   </li>

.. raw:: html

   <li>

hurt an animal on purpose

.. raw:: html

   </li>

.. raw:: html

   </ul>

::

             </td>
             <td>
               <ul>
                 <li>run away from home overnight</li>
                 <li>frequently miss school or work</li>
                 <li>lie frequently </li>
                 <li>forge someone’s signature</li>
                 <li>get into a fight that comes to blows with an intimate partner</li>
                 <li>live with others besides the family for at least one month</li>
                 <li>harass, threaten, or blackmail someone</li>
               </ul>
             </td>
           </tr>
         </tbody></table>

Family, twin, and adoption studies suggest that both genetic and
environmental factors influence the development of antisocial
personality disorder, as well as general antisocial behavior
(criminality, violence, aggressiveness) (Baker, Bezdjian, & Raine,
2006). Personality and temperament dimensions that are related to this
disorder, including fearlessness, impulsive antisociality, and
callousness, have a substantial genetic influence (Livesley & Jang,
2008). Adoption studies clearly demonstrate that the development of
antisocial behavior is determined by the interaction of genetic factors
and adverse environmental circumstances (Rhee & Waldman, 2002). For
example, one investigation found that adoptees of biological parents
with antisocial personality disorder were more likely to exhibit
adolescent and adult antisocial behaviors if they were raised in adverse
adoptive family environments (e.g., adoptive parents had marital
problems, were divorced, used drugs, and had legal problems) than if
they were raised in a more normal adoptive environment (Cadoret, Yates,
Ed, Woodworth, & Stewart, 1995).

Researchers who are interested in the importance of environment in the
development of antisocial personality disorder have directed their
attention to such factors as the community, the structure and
functioning of the family, and peer groups. Each of these factors
influences the likelihood of antisocial behavior. One longitudinal
investigation of more than 800 Seattle-area youth measured risk factors
for violence at 10, 14, 16, and 18 years of age (Herrenkohl et al.,
2000). The risk factors examined included those involving the family,
peers, and community. A portion of the findings from this study are
provided in `[link] <#Figure_15_10_Riskfactor>`__.

|A table is titled “risk factors during adolescence that predict later
violence.” Risk factors are matched to age groups of “age 10 predictor
(elementary school),” “age 14 predictor (middle school),” and “age 16
predictor (high school).” In the “family” category, “parental violence”
is marked for age 14, “parent criminality” for ages 14 and 16, “poor
family management” for ages 14 and 16, “family conflict” for ages 14 and
16, “parental attitudes favorable to violence” for age 10, and
“residential mobility” for age 16. In the “peer” category, “peer
delinquency” is marked for ages 10, 14, and 16; “gang membership” is
marked for ages 14 and 16. In the “community” category, “economic
deprivation” is marked for ages 10 and 16, “community disorganization”
is marked for ages 14 and 16, “availability of drugs” is marked for ages
10, 14, and 16, and “neighborhood adults involved in crime” is marked
for ages 14 and 16.|\ {: #Figure_15_10_Riskfactor}

Those with antisocial tendencies do not seem to experience emotions the
way most other people do. These individuals fail to show fear in
response to environment cues that signal punishment, pain, or noxious
stimulation. For instance, they show less skin conductance (sweatiness
on hands) in anticipation of electric shock than do people without
antisocial tendencies (Hare, 1965). Skin conductance is controlled by
the sympathetic nervous system and is used to assess autonomic nervous
system functioning. When the sympathetic nervous system is active,
people become aroused and anxious, and sweat gland activity increases.
Thus, increased sweat gland activity, as assessed through skin
conductance, is taken as a sign of arousal or anxiety. For those with
antisocial personality disorder, a lack of skin conductance may indicate
the presence of characteristics such as emotional deficits and
impulsivity that underlie the propensity for antisocial behavior and
negative social relationships (Fung et al., 2005).

While emotional deficits may contribute to antisocial personality
disorder, so too might an inability to relate to others’ pain. In a
recent study, 80 prisoners were shown photos of people being
intentionally hurt by others (e.g., someone crushing a person’s hand in
an automobile door) while undergoing brain imaging (Decety, Skelly, &
Kiehl, 2013). Prisoners who scored high on a test of antisocial
tendencies showed significantly less activation in brain regions
involved in the experience of empathy and feeling concerned for others
than did prisoners with low scores on the antisocial test. Notably, the
prisoners who scored high on the antisocial test showed greater
activation in a brain area involved self-awareness, cognitive function,
and interpersonal experience. The investigators suggested that the
heightened activation in this region when watching social interactions
involving one person harming another may reflect a propensity or desire
for this kind of behavior.

Summary
=======

Individuals with personality disorders exhibit a personality style that
is inflexible, causes distress and impairment, and creates problems for
themselves and others. The DSM-5 recognizes 10 personality disorders,
organized into three clusters. The disorders in Cluster A include those
characterized by a personality style that is odd and eccentric. Cluster
B includes personality disorders characterized chiefly by a personality
style that is impulsive, dramatic, highly emotional, and erratic, and
those in Cluster C are characterized by a nervous and fearful
personality style. Two Cluster B personality disorders, borderline
personality disorder and antisocial personality disorder, are especially
problematic. People with borderline personality disorder show marked
instability in mood, behavior, and self-image, as well as impulsivity.
They cannot stand to be alone, are unpredictable, have a history of
stormy relationships, and frequently display intense and inappropriate
anger. Genetic factors and adverse childhood experiences (e.g., sexual
abuse) appear to be important in its development. People with antisocial
personality display a lack of regard for the rights of others; they are
impulsive, deceitful, irresponsible, and unburdened by any sense of
guilt. Genetic factors and socialization both appear to be important in
the origin of antisocial personality disorder. Research has also shown
that those with this disorder do not experience emotions the way most
other people do.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      People with borderline personality disorder often \________.

      1. try to be the center of attention
      2. are shy and withdrawn
      3. are impulsive and unpredictable
      4. tend to accomplish goals through cruelty {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      C

.. container::

   .. container::

      Antisocial personality disorder is associated with \________.

      1. emotional deficits
      2. memory deficits
      3. parental overprotection
      4. increased empathy {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

Critical Thinking Question
==========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Imagine that a child has a genetic vulnerability to antisocial
      personality disorder. How might this child’s environment shape the
      likelihood of developing this personality disorder?

   .. container::

      The environment is likely to be very instrumental in determining
      the likelihood of developing antisocial personality disorder.
      Research has shown that adverse family environments (e.g., divorce
      or marital problems, legal problems, and drug use) are connected
      to antisocial personality disorder, particularly if one is
      genetically vulnerable. Beyond one’s family environment, peer
      group delinquency and community variables (e.g., economic
      deprivation, community disorganization, drug use, and the presence
      of adult antisocial models) heighten the risk of violent behavior.

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   antisocial personality disorder
      characterized by a lack of regard for others’ rights, impulsivity,
      deceitfulness, irresponsibility, and lack of remorse over misdeeds
      ^
   borderline personality disorder
      instability in interpersonal relationships, self-image, and mood,
      as well as impulsivity; key features include intolerance of being
      alone and fear of abandonment, unstable relationships,
      unpredictable behavior and moods, and intense and inappropriate
      anger ^
   personality disorder
      group of DSM-5 disorders characterized by an inflexible and
      pervasive personality style that differs markedly from the
      expectations of one’s culture and causes distress and impairment;
      people with these disorders have a personality style that
      frequently brings them into conflict with others and disrupts
      their ability to develop and maintain social relationships

.. |A table is titled “risk factors during adolescence that predict later violence.” Risk factors are matched to age groups of “age 10 predictor (elementary school),” “age 14 predictor (middle school),” and “age 16 predictor (high school).” In the “family” category, “parental violence” is marked for age 14, “parent criminality” for ages 14 and 16, “poor family management” for ages 14 and 16, “family conflict” for ages 14 and 16, “parental attitudes favorable to violence” for age 10, and “residential mobility” for age 16. In the “peer” category, “peer delinquency” is marked for ages 10, 14, and 16; “gang membership” is marked for ages 14 and 16. In the “community” category, “economic deprivation” is marked for ages 10 and 16, “community disorganization” is marked for ages 14 and 16, “availability of drugs” is marked for ages 10, 14, and 16, and “neighborhood adults involved in crime” is marked for ages 14 and 16.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_15_10_Riskfactorn.jpg
