======================================
Cultural Understandings of Personality
======================================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section you should be able to: \* Discuss
   personality differences of people from collectivist and individualist
   cultures \* Discuss the three approaches to studying personality in a
   cultural context

As you have learned in this chapter, personality is shaped by both
genetic and environmental factors. The **culture**\ {: data-type=“term”
.no-emphasis} in which you live is one of the most important
environmental factors that shapes your personality (Triandis & Suh,
2002). The term **culture**\ {: data-type=“term”} refers to all of the
beliefs, customs, art, and traditions of a particular society. Culture
is transmitted to people through language as well as through the
modeling of culturally acceptable and nonacceptable behaviors that are
either rewarded or punished (Triandis & Suh, 2002). With these ideas in
mind, personality psychologists have become interested in the role of
culture in understanding personality. They ask whether personality
traits are the same across cultures or if there are variations. It
appears that there are both universal and culture-specific aspects that
account for variation in people’s personalities.

Why might it be important to consider cultural influences on
personality? Western ideas about personality may not be applicable to
other cultures (Benet-Martinez & Oishi, 2008). In fact, there is
evidence that the strength of personality traits varies across cultures.
Let’s take a look at some of the Big Five factors (conscientiousness,
neuroticism, openness, and extroversion) across cultures. As you will
learn when you study social psychology, Asian cultures are more
collectivist, and people in these cultures tend to be less extroverted.
People in Central and South American cultures tend to score higher on
openness to experience, whereas Europeans score higher on neuroticism
(Benet-Martinez & Karakitapoglu-Aygun, 2003).

According to this study, there also seem to be regional personality
differences within the United States
(`[link] <#Figure_11_08_Clusters>`__). Researchers analyzed responses
from over 1.5 million individuals in the United States and found that
there are three distinct regional personality clusters: Cluster 1, which
is in the Upper Midwest and Deep South, is dominated by people who fall
into the “friendly and conventional” personality; Cluster 2, which
includes the West, is dominated by people who are more relaxed,
emotionally stable, calm, and creative; and Cluster 3, which includes
the Northeast, has more people who are stressed, irritable, and
depressed. People who live in Clusters 2 and 3 are also generally more
open (Rentfrow et al., 2013).

|A map of the United States is shown. Above it is the label “Personality
Clusters in the Continental United States.” Below it is a legend which
defines areas in the map as either, “Cluster 1: friendly, conventional;”
“Cluster 2: relaxed, creative;” or “Cluster 3: temperamental,
uninhibited.” Cluster 1occurs mainly in the center of the country.
Cluster 2 occurs mainly on the west side of the country. Cluster 3
occurs mainly in the North-East region of the country and also in Texas.
These are generalizations; there are several states which are comprised
of a combination of two different clusters.|\ {: #Figure_11_08_Clusters}

One explanation for the regional differences is **selective
migration**\ {: data-type=“term”} (Rentfrow et al., 2013). Selective
migration is the concept that people choose to move to places that are
compatible with their personalities and needs. For example, a person
high on the agreeable scale would likely want to live near family and
friends, and would choose to settle or remain in such an area. In
contrast, someone high on openness would prefer to settle in a place
that is recognized as diverse and innovative (such as California).

PERSONALITY IN INDIVIDUALIST AND COLLECTIVIST CULTURES
======================================================

Individualist cultures and collectivist cultures place emphasis on
different basic values. People who live in individualist cultures tend
to believe that independence, competition, and personal achievement are
important. Individuals in Western nations such as the United States,
England, and Australia score high on individualism (Oyserman, Coon, &
Kemmelmier, 2002). People who live in collectivist cultures value social
harmony, respectfulness, and group needs over individual needs.
Individuals who live in countries in Asia, Africa, and South America
score high on collectivism (Hofstede, 2001; Triandis, 1995). These
values influence personality. For example, Yang (2006) found that people
in individualist cultures displayed more personally oriented personality
traits, whereas people in collectivist cultures displayed more socially
oriented personality traits.

APPROACHES TO STUDYING PERSONALITY IN A CULTURAL CONTEXT
========================================================

There are three approaches that can be used to study personality in a
cultural context, the *cultural-comparative approach*; the *indigenous
approach*; and the *combined approach*, which incorporates elements of
both views. Since ideas about personality have a Western basis, the
cultural-comparative approach seeks to test Western ideas about
personality in other cultures to determine whether they can be
generalized and if they have cultural validity (Cheung van de Vijver, &
Leong, 2011). For example, recall from the previous section on the trait
perspective that researchers used the cultural-comparative approach to
test the universality of McCrae and Costa’s Five Factor Model. They
found applicability in numerous cultures around the world, with the Big
Five traits being stable in many cultures (McCrae & Costa, 1997; McCrae
et al., 2005). The indigenous approach came about in reaction to the
dominance of Western approaches to the study of personality in
non-Western settings (Cheung et al., 2011). Because Western-based
personality assessments cannot fully capture the personality constructs
of other cultures, the indigenous model has led to the development of
personality assessment instruments that are based on constructs relevant
to the culture being studied (Cheung et al., 2011). The third approach
to cross-cultural studies of personality is the combined approach, which
serves as a bridge between Western and indigenous psychology as a way of
understanding both universal and cultural variations in personality
(Cheung et al., 2011).

Summary
=======

The culture in which you live is one of the most important environmental
factors that shapes your personality. Western ideas about personality
may not be applicable to other cultures. In fact, there is evidence that
the strength of personality traits varies across cultures. Individualist
cultures and collectivist cultures place emphasis on different basic
values. People who live in individualist cultures tend to believe that
independence, competition, and personal achievement are important.
People who live in collectivist cultures value social harmony,
respectfulness, and group needs over individual needs. There are three
approaches that can be used to study personality in a cultural context:
the cultural-comparative approach, the indigenous approach, and the
combined approach, which incorporates both elements of both views.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      The United States is considered a \_______\_ culture.

      1. collectivistic
      2. individualist
      3. traditional
      4. nontraditional {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      The concept that people choose to move to places that are
      compatible with their personalities and needs is known as
      \________.

      1. selective migration
      2. personal oriented personality
      3. socially oriented personality
      4. individualism {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Why might it be important to consider cultural influences on
      personality?

   .. container::

      Since culture influences one’s personality, then Western ideas
      about personality may not be applicable to people of other
      cultures. In addition, Western-based measures of personality
      assessment may not be valid when used to collect data on people
      from other cultures.

Personal Application Questions
==============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      According to the work of Rentfrow and colleagues, personalities
      are not randomly distributed. Instead they fit into distinct
      geographic clusters. Based on where you live, do you agree or
      disagree with the traits associated with yourself and the
      residents of your area of the country? Why or why not?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   culture
      all of the beliefs, customs, art, and traditions of a particular
      society ^
   selective migration
      concept that people choose to move to places that are compatible
      with their personalities and needs

.. |A map of the United States is shown. Above it is the label “Personality Clusters in the Continental United States.” Below it is a legend which defines areas in the map as either, “Cluster 1: friendly, conventional;” “Cluster 2: relaxed, creative;” or “Cluster 3: temperamental, uninhibited.” Cluster 1occurs mainly in the center of the country. Cluster 2 occurs mainly on the west side of the country. Cluster 3 occurs mainly in the North-East region of the country and also in Texas. These are generalizations; there are several states which are comprised of a combination of two different clusters.| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_11_08_Clusters.jpg
