======================
Personality Assessment
======================



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. container::

   By the end of this section, you will be able to: \* Discuss the
   Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory \* Recognize and describe
   common projective tests used in personality assessment

Roberto, Mikhail, and Nat are college friends and all want to be police
officers. Roberto is quiet and shy, lacks self-confidence, and usually
follows others. He is a kind person, but lacks motivation. Mikhail is
loud and boisterous, a leader. He works hard, but is impulsive and
drinks too much on the weekends. Nat is thoughtful and well liked. He is
trustworthy, but sometimes he has difficulty making quick decisions. Of
these three men, who would make the best police officer? What qualities
and personality factors make someone a good police officer? What makes
someone a bad or dangerous police officer?

A police officer’s job is very high in stress, and law enforcement
agencies want to make sure they hire the right people. Personality
testing is often used for this purpose—to screen applicants for
employment and job training. Personality tests are also used in criminal
cases and custody battles, and to assess psychological disorders. This
section explores the best known among the many different types of
personality tests.

SELF-REPORT INVENTORIES
=======================

Self-report inventories are a kind of objective test used to assess
personality. They typically use multiple-choice items or numbered
scales, which represent a range from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5
(strongly agree). They often are called Likert scales after their
developer, Rensis Likert (1932) (`[link] <#Figure_11_09_Likert>`__).

|A Likert-type scale survey is shown. The surveyed items include “I am
easygoing; I have high standards; I enjoy time alone; I work well with
others; I dislike confrontation; and I prefer crowds over intimacy.” To
the right of each of these items are five empty circles. The circles are
labeled “strongly disagree; somewhat disagree; no opinion; somewhat
agree; and strongly agree.”|\ {: #Figure_11_09_Likert}

One of the most widely used personality inventories is the **Minnesota
Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI)**\ {: data-type=“term”}, first
published in 1943, with 504 true/false questions, and updated to the
MMPI-2 in 1989, with 567 questions. The original MMPI was based on a
small, limited sample, composed mostly of Minnesota farmers and
psychiatric patients; the revised inventory was based on a more
representative, national sample to allow for better standardization. The
MMPI-2 takes 1–2 hours to complete. Responses are scored to produce a
clinical profile composed of 10 scales: hypochondriasis, depression,
hysteria, psychopathic deviance (social deviance), masculinity versus
femininity, paranoia, psychasthenia (obsessive/compulsive qualities),
schizophrenia, hypomania, and social introversion. There is also a scale
to ascertain risk factors for alcohol abuse. In 2008, the test was again
revised, using more advanced methods, to the MMPI-2-RF. This version
takes about one-half the time to complete and has only 338 questions
(`[link] <#Figure_11_09_MMPI>`__). Despite the new test’s advantages,
the MMPI-2 is more established and is still more widely used. Typically,
the tests are administered by computer. Although the MMPI was originally
developed to assist in the clinical diagnosis of psychological
disorders, it is now also used for occupational screening, such as in
law enforcement, and in college, career, and marital counseling
(Ben-Porath & Tellegen, 2008).

|Five questions are stacked vertically with two empty bubbles to the
right of each question. Above the bubbles are the labels “True” and
“False.” The questions are as follows: “1. I like gardening magazines.”
“2. I am unhappy with my sex life.” “3. I feel like no one understands
me.” “4. I think I would enjoy the work of a teacher.” “5. I am not
easily awakened by noise.”|\ {: #Figure_11_09_MMPI}

In addition to clinical scales, the tests also have validity and
reliability scales. (Recall the concepts of reliability and validity
from your study of psychological research.) One of the validity scales,
the Lie Scale (or “L” Scale), consists of 15 items and is used to
ascertain whether the respondent is “faking good” (underreporting
psychological problems to appear healthier). For example, if someone
responds “yes” to a number of unrealistically positive items such as “I
have never told a lie,” they may be trying to “fake good” or appear
better than they actually are.

Reliability scales test an instrument’s consistency over time, assuring
that if you take the MMPI-2-RF today and then again 5 years later, your
two scores will be similar. Beutler, Nussbaum, and Meredith (1988) gave
the MMPI to newly recruited police officers and then to the same police
officers 2 years later. After 2 years on the job, police officers’
responses indicated an increased vulnerability to alcoholism, somatic
symptoms (vague, unexplained physical complaints), and anxiety. When the
test was given an additional 2 years later (4 years after starting on
the job), the results suggested high risk for alcohol-related
difficulties.

PROJECTIVE TESTS
================

Another method for assessment of personality is **projective
testing**\ {: data-type=“term”}. This kind of test relies on one of the
defense mechanisms proposed by Freud—projection—as a way to assess
unconscious processes. During this type of testing, a series of
ambiguous cards is shown to the person being tested, who then is
encouraged to project his feelings, impulses, and desires onto the
cards—by telling a story, interpreting an image, or completing a
sentence. Many projective tests have undergone standardization
procedures (for example, Exner, 2002) and can be used to access whether
someone has unusual thoughts or a high level of anxiety, or is likely to
become volatile. Some examples of projective tests are the Rorschach
Inkblot Test, the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), the
Contemporized-Themes Concerning Blacks test, the TEMAS
(Tell-Me-A-Story), and the Rotter Incomplete Sentence Blank (RISB). 

The **Rorschach Inkblot Test**\ {: data-type=“term”} was developed in
1921 by a Swiss psychologist named Hermann Rorschach (pronounced
“ROAR-shock”). It is a series of symmetrical inkblot cards that are
presented to a client by a psychologist. Upon presentation of each card,
the psychologist asks the client, “What might this be?” What the
test-taker sees reveals unconscious feelings and struggles (Piotrowski,
1987; Weiner, 2003). The Rorschach has been standardized using the Exner
system and is effective in measuring depression, psychosis, and anxiety.

A second projective test is the **Thematic Apperception Test (TAT)**\ {:
data-type=“term”}, created in the 1930s by Henry Murray, an American
psychologist, and a psychoanalyst named Christiana Morgan. A person
taking the TAT is shown 8–12 ambiguous pictures and is asked to tell a
story about each picture. The stories give insight into their social
world, revealing hopes, fears, interests, and goals. The storytelling
format helps to lower a person’s resistance divulging unconscious
personal details (Cramer, 2004). The TAT has been used in clinical
settings to evaluate psychological disorders; more recently, it has been
used in counseling settings to help clients gain a better understanding
of themselves and achieve personal growth. Standardization of test
administration is virtually nonexistent among clinicians, and the test
tends to be modest to low on validity and reliability (Aronow, Weiss, &
Rezinkoff, 2001; Lilienfeld, Wood, & Garb, 2000). Despite these
shortcomings, the TAT has been one of the most widely used projective
tests.

A third projective test is the **Rotter Incomplete Sentence Blank
(RISB)**\ {: data-type=“term”} developed by Julian Rotter in 1950
(recall his theory of locus of control, covered earlier in this
chapter). There are three forms of this test for use with different age
groups: the school form, the college form, and the adult form. The tests
include 40 incomplete sentences that people are asked to complete as
quickly as possible (`[link] <#Figure_11_09_ISB>`__). The average time
for completing the test is approximately 20 minutes, as responses are
only 1–2 words in length. This test is similar to a word association
test, and like other types of projective tests, it is presumed that
responses will reveal desires, fears, and struggles. The RISB is used in
screening college students for adjustment problems and in career
counseling (Holaday, Smith, & Sherry, 2010; Rotter & Rafferty 1950).

|Five incomplete sentences are stacked vertically with empty space to
the right of each sentence in which to complete it. The sentence
starters are : “1. I feel,” “2. I regret,” “3. At home,” “4. My mother,”
and “5. My greatest worry.”|\ {: #Figure_11_09_ISB}

For many decades, these traditional projective tests have been used in
cross-cultural personality assessments. However, it was found that test
bias limited their usefulness (Hoy-Watkins & Jenkins-Moore, 2008). It is
difficult to assess the personalities and lifestyles of members of
widely divergent ethnic/cultural groups using personality instruments
based on data from a single culture or race (Hoy-Watkins &
Jenkins-Moore, 2008). For example, when the TAT was used with
African-American test takers, the result was often shorter story length
and low levels of cultural identification (Duzant, 2005). Therefore, it
was vital to develop other personality assessments that explored factors
such as race, language, and level of acculturation (Hoy-Watkins &
Jenkins-Moore, 2008). To address this need, Robert Williams developed
the first culturally specific projective test designed to reflect the
everyday life experiences of African Americans (Hoy-Watkins &
Jenkins-Moore, 2008). The updated version of the instrument is the
**Contemporized-Themes Concerning Blacks Test (C-TCB)**\ {:
data-type=“term”} (Williams, 1972). The C-TCB contains 20 color images
that show scenes of African-American lifestyles. When the C-TCB was
compared with the TAT for African Americans, it was found that use of
the C-TCB led to increased story length, higher degrees of positive
feelings, and stronger identification with the C-TCB (Hoy, 1997;
Hoy-Watkins & Jenkins-Moore, 2008).

The **TEMAS Multicultural Thematic Apperception Test**\ {:
data-type=“term”} is another tool designed to be culturally relevant to
minority groups, especially Hispanic youths. TEMAS—standing for “Tell Me
a Story” but also a play on the Spanish word temas (themes)—uses images
and storytelling cues that relate to minority culture (Constantino,
1982).

Summary
=======

Personality tests are techniques designed to measure one’s personality.
They are used to diagnose psychological problems as well as to screen
candidates for college and employment. There are two types of
personality tests: self-report inventories and projective tests. The
MMPI is one of the most common self-report inventories. It asks a series
of true/false questions that are designed to provide a clinical profile
of an individual. Projective tests use ambiguous images or other
ambiguous stimuli to assess an individual’s unconscious fears, desires,
and challenges. The Rorschach Inkblot Test, the TAT, the RISB, and the
C-TCB are all forms of projective tests.

Review Questions
================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which of the following is NOT a projective test?

      1. Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI)
      2. Rorschach Inkblot Test
      3. Thematic Apperception Test (TAT)
      4. Rotter Incomplete Sentence Blank (RISB) {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

.. container::

   .. container::

      A personality assessment in which a person responds to ambiguous
      stimuli, revealing unconscious feelings, impulses, and desires
      \________.

      1. self-report inventory
      2. projective test
      3. Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI)
      4. Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      B

.. container::

   .. container::

      Which personality assessment employs a series of true/false
      questions?

      1. Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI)
      2. Thematic Apperception Test (TAT)
      3. Rotter Incomplete Sentence Blank (RISB)
      4. Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) {: type=“a”}

   .. container::

      A

Critical Thinking Questions
===========================

.. container::

   .. container::

      Why might a prospective employer screen applicants using
      personality assessments?

   .. container::

      They can help an employer predict a candidate’s reactions and
      attitudes to various situations they might encounter on the job,
      thus helping choose the right person for the job. This is
      particularly important in hiring for a high-risk job such as law
      enforcement. Personality tests can also reveal a potential
      employee’s desirable qualities such as honesty, motivation, and
      conscientiousness.

.. container::

   .. container::

      Why would a clinician give someone a projective test?

   .. container::

      A projective test could give the clinician clues about dreams,
      fears, and personal struggles of which the client may be unaware,
      since these tests are designed to reveal unconscious motivations
      and attitudes. They can also help clinicians diagnose
      psychological disorders.

Personal Application Questions
==============================

.. container::

   .. container::

      How objective do you think you can be about yourself in answering
      questions on self-report personality assessment measures? What
      implications might this have for the validity of the personality
      test?

.. container::

   .. rubric:: Glossary
      :name: glossary

   {: data-type=“glossary-title”}

   Contemporized-Themes Concerning Blacks Test (C-TCB)
      projective test designed to be culturally relevant to African
      Americans, using images that relate to African-American culture ^
   Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI)
      personality test composed of a series of true/false questions in
      order to establish a clinical profile of an individual ^
   Projective test
      personality assessment in which a person responds to ambiguous
      stimuli, revealing hidden feelings, impulses, and desires ^
   Rorschach Inkblot Test
      projective test that employs a series of symmetrical inkblot cards
      that are presented to a client by a psychologist in an effort to
      reveal the person’s unconscious desires, fears, and struggles ^
   Rotter Incomplete Sentence Blank (RISB)
      projective test that is similar to a word association test in
      which a person completes sentences in order to reveal their
      unconscious desires, fears, and struggles ^
   TEMAS Multicultural Thematic Apperception Test
      projective test designed to be culturally relevant to minority
      groups, especially Hispanic youths, using images and storytelling
      that relate to minority culture ^
   Thematic Apperception Test (TAT)
      projective test in which people are presented with ambiguous
      images, and they then make up stories to go with the images in an
      effort to uncover their unconscious desires, fears, and struggles

.. |A Likert-type scale survey is shown. The surveyed items include “I am easygoing; I have high standards; I enjoy time alone; I work well with others; I dislike confrontation; and I prefer crowds over intimacy.” To the right of each of these items are five empty circles. The circles are labeled “strongly disagree; somewhat disagree; no opinion; somewhat agree; and strongly agree.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_11_09_Lickert.jpg
.. |Five questions are stacked vertically with two empty bubbles to the right of each question. Above the bubbles are the labels “True” and “False.” The questions are as follows: “1. I like gardening magazines.” “2. I am unhappy with my sex life.” “3. I feel like no one understands me.” “4. I think I would enjoy the work of a teacher.” “5. I am not easily awakened by noise.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_11_09_MMPI.jpg
.. |Five incomplete sentences are stacked vertically with empty space to the right of each sentence in which to complete it. The sentence starters are : “1. I feel,” “2. I regret,” “3. At home,” “4. My mother,” and “5. My greatest worry.”| image:: ../resources/CNX_Psych_11_09_ISB.jpg
