=======
Preface
=======



.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Welcome to *Psychology*, an OpenStax resource. This textbook was written
to increase student access to high-quality learning materials,
maintaining highest standards of academic rigor at little to no cost.

About OpenStax
==============

OpenStax is a nonprofit based at Rice University, and it’s our mission
to improve student access to education. Our first openly licensed
college textbook was published in 2012, and our library has since scaled
to over 25 books for college and AP® courses used by hundreds of
thousands of students. Our adaptive learning technology, designed to
improve learning outcomes through personalized educational paths, is
being piloted in college courses throughout the country. Through our
partnerships with philanthropic foundations and our alliance with other
educational resource organizations, OpenStax is breaking down the most
common barriers to learning and empowering students and instructors to
succeed.

About OpenStax Resources
========================

Customization
-------------

*Psychology* is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International (CC BY) license, which means that you can distribute,
remix, and build upon the content, as long as you provide attribution to
OpenStax and its content contributors.

Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire
book or pick and choose the sections that are most relevant to the needs
of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your
students certain chapters and sections in your syllabus, in the order
that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your syllabus to
the sections in the web view of your book.

Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of
their OpenStax book. The custom version can be made available to
students in low-cost print or digital form through their campus
bookstore. Visit your book page on openstax.org for more information.

Errata
------

All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like
any professional-grade textbook, errors sometimes occur. Since our books
are web based, we can make updates periodically when deemed
pedagogically necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it
through the link on your book page on openstax.org. Subject matter
experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to
remaining transparent about all updates, so you will also find a list of
past errata changes on your book page on openstax.org.

Format
------

You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through
openstax.org, and in low-cost print and iBooks editions.

About *Psychology*
==================

*Psychology* is designed to meet scope and sequence requirements for the
single-semester introduction to psychology course. The book offers a
comprehensive treatment of core concepts, grounded in both classic
studies and current and emerging research. The text also includes
coverage of the DSM-5 in examinations of psychological disorders.
*Psychology* incorporates discussions that reflect the diversity within
the discipline, as well as the diversity of cultures and communities
across the globe.

Coverage and Scope
------------------

This book is designed to make psychology, as a discipline, interesting
and accessible to students research and examples that represent and
include the various sociocultural backgrounds of the many students who
take this course. The result is a book that covers the breadth of
psychology topics with variety and depth that promote student
engagement. The organization and pedagogical features were developed and
vetted with feedback from psychology educators dedicated to the project.

-  Chapter 1: Introduction to Psychology
-  Chapter 2: Psychological Research
-  Chapter 3: Biopsychology
-  Chapter 4: States of Consciousness
-  Chapter 5: Sensation and Perception
-  Chapter 6: Learning
-  Chapter 7: Thinking and Intelligence
-  Chapter 8: Memory
-  Chapter 9: Lifespan Development
-  Chapter 10: Motivation and Emotion
-  Chapter 11: Personality
-  Chapter 12: Social Psychology
-  Chapter 13: Industrial-Organizational Psychology
-  Chapter 14: Stress, Lifestyle, and Health
-  Chapter 15: Psychological Disorders
-  Chapter 16: Therapy and Treatment {: data-bullet-style=“bullet”}

.. _eip-962:

Pedagogical Foundation
----------------------

Throughout *Psychology*, you will find features that draw the students
into psychological inquiry by taking selected topics a step further.

-  **Everyday Connection** features tie psychological topics to everyday
   issues and behaviors that students encounter in their lives and the
   world. Topics include the validity of scores on college entrance
   exams, advertising and associative learning, and cognitive mapping.
-  **What Do You Think?** features provide research-based information
   and ask students their views on controversial issues. Topics include
   “Brain Dead and on Life Support,” “Hooters and BFOQ Laws,” and
   “Intellectually Disabled Criminals and Capital Punishment.”
-  **Dig Deeper** features discuss one specific aspect of a topic in
   greater depth so students can dig more deeply into the concept.
   Examples include a discussion on the distinction between evolutionary
   psychology and behavioral genetics, an analysis of the increasing
   prevalence rate of ADHD, and a presentation of research on strategies
   for coping with prejudice and discrimination.
-  **Connect the Concepts** features revisit a concept learned in
   another chapter, expanding upon it within a different context.
   Features include “Autism Spectrum Disorder and the Expression of
   Emotions,” “Tweens, Teens, and Social Norms,” and “Conditioning and
   OCD.”

Art, Interactives, and Assessments That Engage
----------------------------------------------

Our art program is designed to enhance students’ understanding of
psychological concepts through simple, effective graphs, diagrams, and
photographs. *Psychology* also incorporates links to relevant
interactive exercises and animations that help bring topics to life.
Selected assessment items touch directly on students’ lives.

-  **Link to Learning** features direct students to online interactive
   exercises and animations that add a fuller context to core content
   and provide an opportunity for application.
-  **Personal Application Questions** engage students in topics at a
   personal level to encourage reflection and promote discussion.

Additional Resources
====================

.. _eip-541:

Student and Instructor Resources
--------------------------------

We’ve compiled additional resources for both students and instructors,
including Getting Started Guides, an instructor solution guide, a test
bank, and PowerPoint slides. Instructor resources require a verified
instructor account, which you can apply for when you log in or create
your account on openstax.org. Take advantage of these resources to
supplement your OpenStax book.

.. _eip-911:

Partner Resources
-----------------

OpenStax Partners are our allies in the mission to make high-quality
learning materials affordable and accessible to students and instructors
everywhere. Their tools integrate seamlessly with our OpenStax titles at
a low cost. To access the partner resources for your text, visit your
book page on openstax.org.

About the Authors
=================

.. _eip-901:

Senior Contributing Authors
---------------------------

Rose M. Spielman (Content Lead)\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Dr. Rose Spielman has been teaching psychology and working as a licensed
clinical psychologist for 20 years. Her academic career has included
positions at Quinnipiac University, Housatonic Community College, and
Goodwin College. As a licensed clinical psychologist, educator, and
volunteer director, Rose is able to connect with people from diverse
backgrounds and facilitate treatment, advocacy, and education. In her
years of work as a teacher, therapist, and administrator, she has helped
thousands of students and clients and taught them to advocate for
themselves and move their lives forward to become more productive
citizens and family members.

Kathryn Dumper, Bainbridge State College\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

William Jenkins, Mercer University\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Arlene Lacombe, Saint Joseph’s University\* \* \* {:
data-type=“newline”}

Marilyn Lovett, Livingstone College\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Marion Perlmutter, University of Michigan

.. _eip-860:

Reviewers
---------

Daniel Bellack, Trident Technical College\* \* \* {:
data-type=“newline”}

Jerimy Blowers, Cayuga Community College\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Salena Brody, Collin College\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Bettina Casad, University of Missouri–St. Louis\* \* \* {:
data-type=“newline”}

Sharon Chacon, Northeast Wisconsin Technical College\* \* \* {:
data-type=“newline”}

Barbara Chappell, Walden University\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

James Corpening\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Frank Eyetsemitan, Roger Williams University\* \* \* {:
data-type=“newline”}

Tamara Ferguson, Utah State University\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Kathleen Flannery, Saint Anselm College\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Johnathan Forbey, Ball State University\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Laura Gaudet, Chadron State College\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

William Goggin, University of Southern Mississippi\* \* \* {:
data-type=“newline”}

Jeffery K. Gray, Charleston Southern University\* \* \* {:
data-type=“newline”}

Heather Griffiths, Fayetteville State University\* \* \* {:
data-type=“newline”}

Mark Holder, University of British Columbia\* \* \* {:
data-type=“newline”}

Rita Houge, Des Moines Area Community College\* \* \* {:
data-type=“newline”}

Colette Jacquot, Strayer University\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

John Johanson, Winona State University\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Andrew Johnson, Park University\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Shaila Khan, Tougaloo College\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Carol Laman, Houston Community College\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Thomas Malloy, Rhode Island College\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Jan Mendoza, Golden West College\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Christopher Miller, University of Minnesota\* \* \* {:
data-type=“newline”}

Lisa Moeller, Beckfield College\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Hugh Riley, Baylor University\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Juan Salinas, University of Texas at Austin\* \* \* {:
data-type=“newline”}

Brittney Schrick, Southern Arkansas University\* \* \* {:
data-type=“newline”}

Phoebe Scotland, College of the Rockies\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Christine Selby, Husson University\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Brian Sexton, Kean University\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Nancy Simpson, Trident Technical College\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Robert Stennett, University of Georgia\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Jennifer Stevenson, Ursinus College\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Eric Weiser, Curry College\* \* \* {: data-type=“newline”}

Valjean Whitlow, American Public University
